Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: 
diagnosis and manag emen t 
NICE guideline 
Published: 20 July 2016 
www .nice.or g.uk/guidance/ng52 
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).
Your r esponsi bility 
The r ecommendations in t his guideline r epresent t he view of NICE, arriv ed at aft er car eful 
consideration of t he evidence a vailable. When e xercising t heir judgement, pr ofessionals 
and practitioners ar e expect ed to tak e this guideline fully int o account, alongside t he 
individual needs, pr eferences and v alues of t heir patient s or t he people using t heir ser vice. 
It is not mandat ory to apply t he recommendations, and t he guideline does not o verride t he 
responsibility t o mak e decisions appr opriat e to the cir cumstances of t he individual, in 
consultation wit h them and t heir f amilies and car ers or guar dian. 
All pr oblems (adv erse e vents) related to a medicine or medical de vice used f or treatment 
or in a pr ocedur e should be r epor ted to the Medicines and Healt hcare product s Regulat ory 
Agency using t he Yellow Car d Scheme . 
Local commissioners and pr oviders of healt hcare have a responsibility t o enable t he 
guideline t o be applied when individual pr ofessionals and people using ser vices wish t o 
use it. The y should do so in t he cont ext of local and national priorities f or funding and 
developing ser vices, and in light of t heir duties t o have due r egar d to the need t o eliminat e 
unlawful discrimination, t o adv ance equality of oppor tunity and t o reduce healt h 
inequalities. Not hing in t his guideline should be int erpreted in a wa y that w ould be 
inconsist ent wit h complying wit h those duties. 
Commissioners and pr oviders ha ve a responsibility t o promot e an en vironmentally 
sustainable healt h and car e syst em and should assess and r educe t he en vironmental 
impact of implementing NICE r ecommendations  wher ever possible. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 of
30
Contents 
Overview ...................................................................................................................................... 4 
Who is it f or? .......................................................................................................................................... 4 
Recommendations ....................................................................................................................... 5 
1.1 Diagnosis ........................................................................................................................................... 5 
1.2 Staging using FDG-PET -CT (fluor odeo xyglucose-positr on emission t omograph y-CT) .......... 6 
1.3 Management of f ollicular lymphoma ............................................................................................. 8 
1.4 Management of MAL T lymphoma .................................................................................................. 11 
1.5 Management of mant le cell lymphoma ......................................................................................... 14 
1.6 Management of diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma ........................................................................... 16 
1.7 Management of Burkitt lymphoma ................................................................................................. 18 
1.8 Management of peripheral T -cell lymphoma ................................................................................ 18 
1.9 Information and suppor t ................................................................................................................. 19 
1.10 Follow-up f or people wit h diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma ......................................................... 20 
1.11 Sur vivorship .................................................................................................................................... 21 
Putting t his guideline int o practice ............................................................................................ 22 
Recommendations f or resear ch ................................................................................................. 24 
1 Baseline FDG-PET -CT imaging f or people wit h diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma stage  II or 
above ...................................................................................................................................................... 24 
2 Fact ors pr edicting out comes f or people wit h high-grade transf ormation of f ollicular 
lymphoma ............................................................................................................................................... 24 
3 Radiot herap y in first -line tr eatment of diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma ........................................ 25 
Cont ext ......................................................................................................................................... 27 
Finding mor e information and committ ee details ..................................................................... 29 
Updat e information ..................................................................................................................... 30 Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 3 of
30
Overview 
This guideline co vers diagnosing and managing non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in people aged 
16 years and o ver. It aims t o impr ove car e for people wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma b y 
promoting t he best t ests for diagnosis and staging and t he most eff ectiv e treatment s for 6 
of the subtypes. T ests and tr eatment s covered include e xcision biopsy , radiot herap y, 
immunochemot herap y and st em cell transplantation. 
NICE has also pr oduced a  COVID-19 rapid guideline on haemat opoietic st em cell 
transplantation . 
Who is i t for? 
• Healt hcare professionals 
• People wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and t heir f amilies and car ers Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 4 of
30
Recommenda tions 
People ha ve the right t o be in volved in discussions and mak e informed decisions 
about t heir car e, as described in NICE's inf ormation on making decisions about y our 
care. 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines  explains ho w we use w ords to sho w the 
strengt h (or cer tainty) of our r ecommendations, and has inf ormation about 
prescribing medicines (including off -label use), pr ofessional guidelines, standar ds 
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and saf eguar ding. 
1.1 D iagnosis 
Malignant lymphoma is an HIV indicat or condition as described in HIV in Eur ope's HIV 
indicat or conditions . Also see recommendations 1 .1.5 and 1 .1.8 in t he NICE guideline on HIV 
testing . 
Type o f biopsy 
1.1.1 Consider an e xcision biopsy as t he first diagnostic pr ocedur e for people wit h 
suspect ed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma at first pr esentation. 
1.1.2 In people wit h suspect ed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma f or whom t he risk of a 
surgical pr ocedur e outw eighs t he pot ential benefit s of an e xcision biopsy , 
consider a needle cor e biopsy pr ocedur e. Take the maximum number of cor es of 
the lar gest possible calibr e. 
1.1.3 For people wit h suspect ed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in whom a diagnosis is not 
possible aft er a needle cor e biopsy pr ocedur e, off er an e xcision biopsy (if 
surgically f easible) in pr eference t o a second needle cor e biopsy pr ocedur e. 
1.1.4 Pathology depar tment s should ensur e that tissue is conser ved when handling 
needle cor e biopsies, so t hat fur ther analysis can be carried out if needed. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 5 of
30
Diagnosing B-c ell lymphomas: g ene testing str ategies 
1.1.5 Consider using FISH (fluor escence in situ h ybridisation) t o identify a MYC 
rearrangement in all people newly pr esenting wit h hist ologically high-grade B-cell 
lymphoma. 
1.1.6 If a MYC rearrangement is f ound, use FISH t o identify t he immunoglobulin par tner 
and t he pr esence of BCL2  and BCL6  rearrangement s. 
Stratifying hig h-grade B-c ell lymphomas using labor atory 
techniques 
1.1.7 Do not use immunohist ochemistr y to assess t he pr ognostic v alue associat ed wit h 
cell of origin in people wit h diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma. 
1.1.8 Interpret FISH r esult s (MYC, BCL2  and BCL6  rearrangement s) in t he cont ext of 
other pr ognostic f actors (par ticularly t he person's age and Int ernational 
Prognostic Inde x [IPI]). 
1.1.9 Explain FISH r esult s and t heir pot ential pr ognostic v alue t o people wit h B-cell 
lymphoma. 
1.2 S taging using FDG- PET-CT 
(fluor odeoxyglucose-posi tron emission 
tomogr aphy-CT) 
Confirming stag ing 
1.2.1 Offer FDG-PET -CT imaging t o confirm staging f or people diagnosed wit h: 
• stage  I diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma b y clinical and CT crit eria 
• stage  I or localised stage  II follicular lymphoma if disease is t hought t o be 
encompassable wit hin a radiot herap y field Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 6 of
30
• stage  I or II Burkitt lymphoma wit h other lo w-risk f eatur es. 
1.2.2 For people diagnosed wit h other subtypes or stages of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 
not list ed in r ecommendation  1.2.1, consider FDG-PET -CT imaging t o confirm 
staging if t he result s will alt er management. 
Assessing r esponse to tr eatmen t for dif fuse lar ge B-c ell 
lymphoma 
1.2.3 Do not r outinely off er FDG-PET -CT imaging f or int erim assessment during 
treatment f or diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma. 
End-of-treatmen t assessmen t 
1.2.4 Offer FDG-PET -CT imaging t o assess r esponse at completion of planned 
treatment f or people wit h: 
• diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma 
• Burkitt lymphoma. 
1.2.5 For people wit h other subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma not list ed in 
recommendation  1.2.4, do not r outinely off er FDG-PET -CT imaging t o assess 
response at completion of planned tr eatment unless t he result s will alt er 
management. 
1.2.6 Consider FDG-PET -CT imaging t o assess r esponse t o treatment bef ore 
autologous st em cell transplantation f or people wit h high-grade non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 7 of
30
1.3 M anag emen t of follicular l ymphoma 
First-line tr eatmen t for stag e IIA f ollicular l ymphoma 
1.3.1 Offer local radiot herap y as first -line tr eatment t o people wit h localised stage  IIA 
follicular lymphoma. 
1.3.2 Consider 'wat ch and wait' ( obser vation wit hout t herap y) as first -line tr eatment f or 
people wit h stage  IIA follicular lymphoma who ar e asympt omatic and f or whom 
treatment wit h a single radiot herap y volume is not suitable. 
1.3.3 Offer the same tr eatment s that might be off ered to people wit h adv anced-stage 
(stages  III and  IV) sympt omatic f ollicular lymphoma t o people wit h stage  IIA 
follicular lymphoma who ar e sympt omatic and f or whom radiot herap y is not 
suitable. 
Treating ad vanced-stag e asym ptoma tic follicular l ymphoma 
1.3.4 Offer rituximab induction t herap y to people wit h adv anced-stage (stages  III 
and IV) follicular lymphoma who ar e asympt omatic. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) rituximab did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant 
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed consent 
should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical Council's 
Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther inf ormation. 
The e vidence r eview ed for the guideline suppor ts the standar d monot herap y 
dosage of 4  doses of 37 5 mg/m2
 at weekly int ervals. 
Treating ad vanced-stag e sym ptoma tic follicular l ymphoma 
1.3.5 Rituximab, in combination wit h: 
• cyclophosphamide, vincristine and pr ednisolone (CVP) Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 8 of
30
• cyclophosphamide, do xorubicin, vincristine and pr ednisolone (CHOP) 
• mitoxantr one, chlorambucil and pr ednisolone (MCP) 
• cyclophosphamide, do xorubicin, et oposide, pr ednisolone and int erferon-α 
(CHVPi ) or 
• chlorambucil 
is recommended as an option f or the tr eatment of sympt omatic stage  III 
and IV follicular lymphoma in pr eviously untr eated people. [This 
recommendation is fr om NICE's t echnology appraisal guidance on rituximab 
for the first -line tr eatment of stage  III–IV f ollicular lymphoma .] 
1.3.6 Rituximab maint enance t herap y is r ecommended as an option f or the tr eatment 
of people wit h follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma t hat has r esponded t o first -line 
induction t herap y wit h rituximab in combination wit h chemot herap y. [This 
recommendation is fr om NICE's t echnology appraisal guidance on rituximab f or 
the first -line maint enance tr eatment of f ollicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma .] 
The guideline committ ee did not assess e vidence or de velop r ecommendations on 
bendamustine f or treating people wit h follicular lymphoma, because a NICE t echnology 
appraisal on 't he clinical and cost eff ectiv eness of bendamustine in combination wit h 
rituximab wit hin it s licensed indication f or the first -line tr eatment of adv anced indolent 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma' was in de velopment. This t echnology appraisal is curr ently 
suspended. 
Treating ad vanced-stag e relapse d or r efractory follicular 
lymphoma 
The r ecommendations in t his section ar e from NICE's t echnology appraisal guidance on 
rituximab f or the tr eatment of r elapsed or r efract ory stage  III or IV follicular non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma . 
1.3.7 Rituximab, wit hin it s mark eting aut horisation, in combination wit h chemot herap y, 
is recommended as an option f or the induction of r emission in people wit h 
relapsed stage  III or IV follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 9 of
30
1.3.8 Rituximab monot herap y as maint enance t herap y, within it s mark eting 
authorisation, is r ecommended as an option f or the tr eatment of people wit h 
relapsed stage  III or IV follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in r emission induced 
with chemot herap y wit h or wit hout rituximab. 
1.3.9 Rituximab monot herap y, within it s mark eting aut horisation, is r ecommended as 
an option f or the tr eatment of people wit h relapsed or r efract ory stage  III or IV 
follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, when all alt ernativ e treatment options ha ve 
been e xhaust ed (t hat is, if t here is r esistance t o or int olerance of chemot herap y). 
Conso lidation wi th stem c ell tr ansp lantation 
1.3.10 Offer consolidation wit h aut ologous st em cell transplantation f or people wit h 
follicular lymphoma in second or subsequent r emission ( complet e or par tial) who 
have not alr eady had a transplant and who ar e fit enough f or transplantation. 
1.3.11 Consider consolidation wit h allogeneic st em cell transplantation f or people wit h 
follicular lymphoma in second or subsequent r emission ( complet e or par tial): 
• who ar e fit enough f or transplantation and 
• for whom a suitable donor can be f ound and 
• when aut ologous st em cell transplantation has not r esult ed in r emission or is 
inappr opriat e (for example, because st em cell har vesting is not possible). 
Treating tr ansf orme d follicular l ymphoma 
1.3.12 Consider consolidation wit h aut ologous st em cell transplantation f or people wit h 
transf ormation of pr eviously diagnosed f ollicular lymphoma t hat has r esponded t o 
treatment and who ar e fit enough f or transplantation. 
1.3.13 Consider consolidation wit h aut ologous or allogeneic st em cell transplantation f or 
people wit h transf ormation of f ollicular lymphoma who need mor e than 1  line of 
treatment f or a r esponse and who ar e fit enough f or transplantation. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 10 of
30
1.3.14 Do not off er consolidation wit h high-dose t herap y and aut ologous or allogeneic 
stem cell transplantation t o people pr esenting wit h concurr ent diagnoses of 
follicular lymphoma and diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma t hat ha ve responded t o 
first-line tr eatment. 
1.4 M anag emen t of MAL T lymphoma 
First-line tr eatmen t 
Gastric MAL T lymphoma: localised disease 
1.4.1 Offer 1 or mor e lines of Helicobact er pylori eradication t herap y, without an y 
concurr ent t herap y, to people wit h H. pylori-positiv e gastric MAL T lymphoma (see 
the NICE guideline on gastr o-oesophageal r eflux disease and dyspepsia in 
adult s). 
1.4.2 Consider H. pylori eradication t herap y for people wit h H. pylori-negativ e gastric 
MALT lymphoma (see t he NICE guideline on gastr o-oesophageal r eflux disease 
and dyspepsia in adult s). 
1.4.3 Consider 'wat ch and wait' ( obser vation wit hout t herap y) for people wit h gastric 
MALT lymphoma t hat r esponds clinically and endoscopically t o H. pylori 
eradication t herap y but who ha ve residual disease sho wn b y sur veillance 
biopsies of t he st omach, unless high-risk f eatur es ar e present. 
1.4.4 For people wit h residual MAL T lymphoma aft er H. pylori eradication t herap y who 
are at high risk of pr ogression [ H. pylori-negativ e at initial pr esentation or t(11:18) 
translocation], consider a choice of t he following, in discussion wit h the person: 
• chemot herap y (for example, chlorambucil or CVP) in combination wit h 
rituximab or 
• gastric radiot herap y. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) rituximab did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 11 of
30
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed 
consent should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical 
Council's Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther 
information. 
1.4.5 For people wit h progressiv e gastric MAL T lymphoma, off er a choice of: 
• chemot herap y (for example, chlorambucil or CVP) in combination wit h 
rituximab or 
• gastric radiot herap y. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) rituximab did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant 
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed 
consent should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical 
Council's Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther 
information. 
Gastric MAL T lymphoma: disseminat ed disease 
1.4.6 Offer H. pylori eradication t herap y to people wit h disseminat ed H. pylori-positiv e 
gastric MAL T lymphoma (see t he NICE guideline on gastr o-oesophageal r eflux 
disease and dyspepsia in adult s). 
1.4.7 Offer chemot herap y (for example, chlorambucil or CVP) in combination wit h 
rituximab t o people wit h disseminat ed gastric MAL T lymphoma who need 
treatment; f or example, people who ar e sympt omatic or wit h threatened vital 
organ function. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) rituximab did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant 
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed consent 
should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical Council's 
Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther inf ormation. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 12 of
30
1.4.8 Consider 'wat ch and wait' ( obser vation wit hout t herap y) for people wit h 
disseminat ed gastric MAL T lymphoma who ar e asympt omatic and do not ha ve 
threatened vital or gan function. 
Non-gastric MAL T lymphoma 
1.4.9 For people wit h non-gastric MAL T lymphoma, tak e into account t he following 
before recommending an y treatment: 
• site of in volvement and pot ential f or or gan dysfunction 
• whet her it is localised or disseminat ed 
• the morbidity associat ed wit h any treatment pr oposed 
• the person's o verall fitness. 
1.4.10 Offer chemot herap y (for example, chlorambucil or CVP) in combination wit h 
rituximab t o people wit h non-gastric MAL T lymphoma f or whom radiot herap y is 
not suitable or who ha ve disseminat ed disease and need tr eatment. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) rituximab did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant 
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed consent 
should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical Council's 
Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther inf ormation. 
1.4.11 Consider radiot herap y for people wit h localised disease sit es of non-gastric 
MALT lymphoma, irr espectiv e of stage. 
1.4.12 Consider 'wat ch and wait' ( obser vation wit hout t herap y) for people wit h clinically 
non-pr ogressiv e localised non-gastric MAL T lymphoma t hat is unlik ely to result in 
vital or gan dysfunction, who ar e asympt omatic and f or whom radiot herap y is not 
suitable. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 13 of
30
1.5 M anag emen t of man tle c ell lymphoma 
First-line tr eatmen t 
1.5.1 Offer chemot herap y in combination wit h rituximab as first -line tr eatment f or 
people wit h adv anced-stage mant le cell lymphoma who ar e sympt omatic. T ake 
the person's fitness int o account when deciding on t he int ensity of 
chemot herap y. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) rituximab did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant 
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed consent 
should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical Council's 
Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther inf ormation. 
1.5.2 Consider cytarabine-containing immunochemot herap y for people wit h 
advanced-stage mant le cell lymphoma who ar e fit enough t o tolerat e an int ensiv e 
appr oach. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) cytarabine did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant 
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed consent 
should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical Council's 
Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther inf ormation. 
1.5.3 Consider radiot herap y for people wit h localised stage  I or II mant le cell 
lymphoma. 
1.5.4 Consider 'wat ch and wait' ( obser vation wit hout t herap y) until disease pr ogression 
for people wit h clinically non-pr ogressiv e mant le cell lymphoma who ar e 
asympt omatic and f or whom radiot herap y is not suitable. 
1.5.5 Bortezomib is r ecommended, wit hin it s mark eting aut horisation, as an option f or 
previously untr eated mant le cell lymphoma in adult s for whom haemat opoietic 
stem cell transplantation is unsuitable. [This r ecommendation is fr om NICE's 
technology appraisal guidance on bor tezomib f or pr eviously untr eated mant le cell 
lymphoma .] Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 14 of
30
The guideline committ ee did not assess e vidence or de velop r ecommendations on 
bendamustine f or treating people wit h mant le cell lymphoma, because a NICE t echnology 
appraisal on 't he clinical and cost eff ectiv eness of bendamustine in combination wit h 
rituximab wit hin it s licensed indication f or the first -line tr eatment of mant le cell lymphoma' 
was in de velopment. This t echnology appraisal is curr ently suspended. 
Conso lidation wi th stem c ell tr ansp lantation 
1.5.6 Consider consolidation wit h aut ologous st em cell transplantation f or people wit h 
chemosensitiv e mant le cell lymphoma (t hat is, t here has been at least a par tial 
response t o induction chemot herap y) who ar e fit enough f or transplantation. 
Maintenanc e str ategies 
1.5.7 Consider maint enance rituximab, e very 2 mont hs until disease pr ogression, f or 
people wit h newly diagnosed mant le cell lymphoma who ar e not fit enough f or 
high-dose chemot herap y and wher e there has been a r esponse t o 
R-CHOP -based immunochemot herap y. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) rituximab did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant 
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed consent 
should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical Council's 
Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther inf ormation. 
The e vidence r eview ed for the guideline suppor ts a dosage of 37 5 mg/m2
 every 
2 mont hs until disease pr ogression. 
1.5.8 Consider maint enance rituximab, e very 2 mont hs for 3 years, f or people wit h 
newly diagnosed mant le cell lymphoma who ar e in r emission aft er 
cytarabine-based induction and high-dose chemot herap y. 
At the time of publication (July 2016) rituximab did not ha ve a UK mark eting 
authorisation f or this indication. The pr escriber should f ollow relevant 
professional guidance, taking full r esponsibility f or the decision. Inf ormed consent 
should be obtained and document ed. See t he General Medical Council's 
Prescribing guidance: pr escribing unlicensed medicines  for fur ther inf ormation. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 15 of
30
The e vidence r eview ed for the guideline suppor ts a dosage of 37 5 mg/m2
 every 
2 mont hs for 3 years. 
1.6 Manag emen t of diffuse lar ge B-c ell lymphoma 
Radiother apy in fir st-line tr eatmen t 
1.6.1 Consider consolidation radiot herap y deliv ering 30  Gy to sites in volved wit h bulk 
disease at diagnosis f or people wit h adv anced-stage diffuse lar ge B-cell 
lymphoma t hat has r esponded t o first -line immunochemot herap y. For each 
person, balance t he possible lat e eff ects of radiot herap y wit h the possible 
increased need f or salv age t herap y if it is omitt ed, and discuss t he options wit h 
them. 
Central ner vous system pr ophylaxis 
1.6.2 Explain t o people wit h diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma t hat t hey have an incr eased 
risk of central ner vous syst em lymphoma if t he testis, br east, adr enal gland or 
kidne y is aff ected. 
1.6.3 Explain t o people wit h diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma t hat t hey ma y have an 
increased risk of central ner vous syst em lymphoma if t hey have 2 or mor e of t he 
following f actors: 
• elevated lactat e deh ydrogenase (LDH) 
• age o ver 60  years 
• poor per formance status (ECOG scor e of 2  or mor e) 
• more than one e xtranodal sit e involved 
• stage  III or IV disease. 
Explain t hat t he le vel of risk incr eases wit h the number of f actors in volved. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 16 of
30
1.6.4 Offer central ner vous syst em-dir ected pr ophylactic t herap y to people wit h 
diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma: 
• that in volves the testis, br east, adr enal gland or kidne y or 
• who ha ve 4 or 5 of t he factors associat ed wit h incr eased risk of central 
nervous syst em relapse list ed in r ecommendation  1.6.3. 
1.6.5 Consider central ner vous syst em-dir ected pr ophylactic t herap y for people wit h 
diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma who ha ve 2 or 3 of t he factors associat ed wit h 
increased risk of central ner vous syst em relapse list ed in r ecommendation  1.6.3. 
Salvage ther apy and c onso lidation wi th stem c ell tr ansp lantation 
1.6.6 Offer salv age t herap y wit h multi-agent immunochemot herap y to people wit h 
relapsed or r efract ory diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma who ar e fit enough t o 
tolerat e intensiv e therap y: 
• explain t hat t his is primarily t o obtain sufficient r esponse t o allo w 
consolidation wit h aut ologous or allogeneic st em cell transplantation, but is 
also beneficial e ven if not f ollowed by transplantation 
• consider R-GDP immunochemot herap y, which is as eff ectiv e as ot her 
commonly used salv age r egimens and less t oxic. 
1.6.7 Offer consolidation wit h aut ologous st em cell transplantation t o people wit h 
chemosensitiv e diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma (t hat is, t here has been at least a 
partial response t o chemot herap y) who ar e fit enough f or transplantation. 
1.6.8 Consider consolidation wit h allogeneic st em cell transplantation f or people wit h 
chemosensitiv e diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma (t hat is, t here has been at least a 
partial response t o chemot herap y): 
• that r elapses aft er aut ologous st em cell transplantation or 
• in whom st em cell har vesting is not possible. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 17 of
30
1.7 Manag emen t of Burkitt lymphoma 
First-line tr eatmen t 
1.7.1 Offer int ensiv e immunochemot herap y to people wit h Burkitt lymphoma who ar e 
fit enough t o tolerat e it. Consider using one of t he following: 
• R-BFM 
• R-CODO X-M/R-IV AC 
• R-HyperCV AD (HDMTX) 
• R-LMB. 
1.7.2 For people wit h low-risk Burkitt lymphoma, consider using t he less int ensiv e 
DA-EPOCH-R r egimen supplement ed wit h intra venous and/or intrat hecal 
methotrexate. 
1.7.3 Offer less int ensiv e immunochemot herap y to people wit h Burkitt lymphoma who 
are not fit enough t o tolerat e intensiv e chemot herap y. Consider using one of t he 
following, alone or supplement ed wit h intra venous and/or intrat hecal 
methotrexate: 
• R-CHOP 
• R-CHEOP 
• DA-EPOCH-R. 
1.8 M anag emen t of perip heral T-cell lymphoma 
First-line tr eatmen t 
1.8.1 Consider CHOP chemot herap y as first -line tr eatment f or people wit h peripheral 
T-cell lymphoma. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 18 of
30
Conso lidation ther apy 
1.8.2 Consider consolidation wit h aut ologous st em cell transplantation f or people wit h 
chemosensitiv e peripheral T -cell lymphoma (t hat is, t here has been at least a 
partial response t o first -line chemot herap y) who ar e fit enough f or 
transplantation. 
1.9 Informa tion and suppor t 
1.9.1 To help people wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (and t heir f amily members or 
carers as appr opriat e) to mak e decisions about car e, follow the recommendations 
in the NICE guidelines on patient e xperience in adult NHS ser vices , improving 
outcomes in haemat ological cancers – t he manual  (patient -centr ed car e), 
improving suppor tive and palliativ e car e for adult s wit h cancer  and care of dying 
adult s in t he last da ys of lif e. Pay par ticular att ention t o the following ar eas: 
• establishing t he best wa y of communicating wit h the person 
• timing and f ormat of inf ormation 
• information about tr eatment, including benefit s, shor t-term risks and lat e 
effects 
• financial suppor t and benefit advice 
• fertility issues 
• sexual function 
• suppor t groups 
• access t o wellbeing ser vices and psy chological suppor t. 
1.9.2 Give people wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (and t heir f amily members or car ers 
as appr opriat e) detailed inf ormation about t he natur e and purpose of diagnostic 
and staging t ests, including: 
• bone marr ow biopsies Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 19 of
30
• central line inser tion 
• core and e xcision biopsies 
• CT and PET -CT scans 
• lumbar punctur es. 
1.9.3 If 'wat ch and wait' ( obser vation wit hout t herap y) is suggest ed for a person wit h 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: 
• explain t o them (and t heir f amily members or car ers as appr opriat e) about 
what t his in volves and wh y it is being advised 
• addr ess an y incr eased anxiety t hat r esult s from t his appr oach. 
1.9.4 Explain t o people wit h low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma about t he possibility 
of transf ormation t o high-grade lymphoma, taking int o account t he person's 
needs and pr eferences. In volve family members or car ers as appr opriat e. 
1.9.5 Ensur e that people wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma ha ve: 
• a named k ey worker at diagnosis and during tr eatment and 
• contact details f or the specialist t eam aft er treatment. 
1.9.6 Discuss e xercise and lif estyle wit h people wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma fr om 
diagnosis onwar ds. 
1.10 F ollow-up f or pe ople wi th dif fuse lar ge B-c ell 
lymphoma 
1.10.1 For people in complet e remission aft er first -line tr eatment wit h curativ e intent f or 
diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma: 
• offer regular clinical assessment 
• consider st opping r egular clinical assessment aimed at det ecting r elapse Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 20 of
30
3 years aft er completing tr eatment f or people in ongoing complet e remission 
• offer ur gent appointment s to people who e xperience a r ecurr ence of 
lymphoma sympt oms or new sympt oms t hat suggest disease r elapse 
• do not off er LDH sur veillance f or det ecting r elapse 
• do not off er routine sur veillance imaging (including chest X -ray, CT and 
PET-CT) f or det ecting r elapse in people who ar e asympt omatic. 
1.11 S urvivorship 
1.11.1 Provide end-of -treatment summaries f or people wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 
(and t heir GPs). Discuss t hese wit h the person, highlighting personal and general 
risk f actors, including lat e eff ects related to their lymphoma subtype and/or it s 
treatment. 
1.11.2 Provide inf ormation t o people wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma when t hey complet e 
treatment about ho w to recognise possible r elapse and lat e eff ects of tr eatment. 
1.11.3 At 3 years aft er a person wit h non-Hodgkin's lymphoma complet es a course of 
treatment, consider swit ching sur veillance of lat e eff ects of tr eatment t o 
nurse-led or GP -led ser vices. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 21 of
30
Putting this guideline in to pr actice 
NICE has pr oduced tools and r esour ces to help y ou put t his guideline int o practice. 
Putting r ecommendations int o practice can tak e time. Ho w long ma y vary from guideline t o 
guideline, and depends on ho w much change in practice or ser vices is needed. 
Implementing change is most eff ectiv e when aligned wit h local priorities. 
Changes r ecommended f or clinical practice t hat can be done quickly – lik e changes in 
prescribing practice – should be shar ed quickly . This is because healt hcare professionals 
should use guidelines t o guide t heir w ork – as is r equir ed by professional r egulating bodies 
such as t he General Medical and Nursing and Midwif ery Councils. 
Changes should be implement ed as soon as possible, unless t here is a good r eason f or not 
doing so (f or example, if it w ould be bett er value f or mone y if a package of 
recommendations w ere all implement ed at once). 
Different or ganisations ma y need diff erent appr oaches t o implementation, depending on 
their siz e and function. Sometimes individual practitioners ma y be able t o respond t o 
recommendations t o impr ove their practice mor e quickly t han lar ge or ganisations. 
Here are some point ers t o help or ganisations put NICE guidelines int o practice: 
1. Raise awar eness  through r outine communication channels, such as email or 
newslett ers, r egular meetings, int ernal staff briefings and ot her communications wit h all 
relevant par tner or ganisations. Identify t hings staff can include in t heir o wn practice 
straight awa y. 
2. Identify a lead  with an int erest in t he topic t o champion t he guideline and motiv ate 
others t o suppor t its use and mak e ser vice changes, and t o find out an y significant issues 
locally . 
3. Carr y out a baseline assessment  against t he recommendations t o find out whet her 
there are gaps in curr ent ser vice pr ovision. 
4. Think about what data y ou need t o measur e impr ovement  and plan ho w you will collect 
it. You ma y want t o work wit h other healt h and social car e organisations and specialist Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 22 of
30
groups t o compar e curr ent practice wit h the recommendations. This ma y also help identify 
local issues t hat will slo w or pr event implementation. 
5. Develop an action plan , with the st eps needed t o put t he guideline int o practice, and 
make sur e it is r eady as soon as possible. Big, comple x changes ma y tak e longer t o 
implement, but some ma y be quick and easy t o do. An action plan will help in bot h cases. 
6. For very big changes  include milest ones and a business case, which will set out 
additional cost s, sa vings and possible ar eas f or disin vestment. A small pr oject gr oup could 
develop t he action plan. The gr oup might include t he guideline champion, a senior 
organisational sponsor , staff in volved in t he associat ed ser vices, finance and inf ormation 
professionals. 
7. Implement t he action plan  with oversight fr om t he lead and t he pr oject gr oup. Big 
project s ma y also need pr oject management suppor t. 
8. Review and monit or how well the guideline is being implement ed through t he pr oject 
group. Shar e progress wit h those in volved in making impr ovement s, as w ell as r elevant 
boar ds and local par tners. 
NICE pr ovides a compr ehensiv e programme of suppor t and r esour ces t o maximise uptak e 
and use of e vidence and guidance. See our into practice  pages f or mor e information. 
Also see Leng G, Moor e V, Abraham S, edit ors (2014) Achie ving high quality car e – 
practical e xperience fr om NICE . Chichest er: Wile y. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 23 of
30
Recommenda tions f or research 
The guideline committ ee has made t he following r ecommendations f or resear ch. 
1 Baseline FDG- PET-CT imag ing f or pe ople wi th 
diffuse lar ge B-c ell lymphoma stag e II or abo ve 
In people wit h diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma stage  II or abo ve, does a baseline 
FDG-PET -CT scan ha ve any adv antages o ver a baseline CT scan in t he corr ect 
interpretation of t he end-of -treatment FDG-PET -CT scan? 
Why this is im portant 
A number of consensus-based guidelines and a body of clinical opinion adv ocate baseline 
FDG-PET -CT imaging as being impor tant f or int erpreting end-of -treatment r esponse using 
FDG-PET -CT, although t here is litt le published e vidence f or this. Baseline FDG-PET -CT is 
also consider ed to have an impor tant contribution 'o ver and abo ve' that of 
contrast -enhanced diagnostic CT in assigning t he Int ernational Pr ognostic Inde x (IPI), in 
terms of identifying disease stage and number of e xtranodal sit es in volved (influencing t he 
decision t o off er central ner vous syst em pr ophylaxis).  A prospectiv e trial is needed t o 
determine whet her baseline FDG-PET -CT is needed t o interpret end-of -treatment 
FDG-PET -CT and it s role in assigning IPI. P eople wit h newly hist ologically diagnosed 
diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma w ould ha ve baseline contrast -enhanced CT , baseline 
FDG-PET -CT and end-of -treatment FDG-PET -CT imaging. R eaders w ould need t o be 
trained in bot h imaging t echniques and be e xperienced members of lymphoma 
multidisciplinar y teams. The r eference standar d would be hist ological confirmation of an y 
positiv e or equiv ocal end-of -treatment FDG-PET -CT findings, or f ollow-up if t here is a 
negativ e end-of -treatment scan. 
2 Factors predicting ou tcomes f or pe ople wi th 
high-grade tr ansf orma tion o f follicular l ymphoma 
In people wit h high-grade transf ormation of f ollicular lymphoma, which biological and 
clinical f actors pr edict good out comes wit h immunochemot herap y alone? Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 4 of
30
Why this is im portant 
Before rituximab, it was accept ed that high-grade transf ormation of f ollicular lymphoma t o 
diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma por tended a poor pr ognosis. R ecent data suggest t hat 
although transf ormation r emains an impor tant clinical e vent, out comes ha ve impr oved. It is 
unclear which people ar e likely to do w ell wit h con ventional tr eatment (such as R-CHOP) 
and which people ma y benefit fr om int ensiv e treatment wit h, for example, high-dose 
therap y and aut ologous st em cell transplantation. Man y factors ar e likely to influence 
outcome, including clinical f actors (such as age, stage at transf ormation and e xtranodal 
involvement at transf ormation), radiological findings (such as early impr ovement of 
disease identified using an int erim FDG-PET -CT scan) and molecular f actors (such as 
certain driv er mutations pr esent at transf ormation, t he pr esence of MYC translocation and 
response of cir culating tumour DNA t o treatment). A bett er understanding of which f actors 
are associat ed wit h high-risk or lo w-risk disease w ould enable t herap y to be tailor ed to 
the person's needs, r educing unnecessar y toxicity f or people at lo w risk and r eserving 
intensiv e therap y for people at high risk. Out comes of int erest include pr ogression-fr ee 
survival and o verall sur vival in subgr oups defined b y clinical f actors, radiological findings 
and molecular analyses. 
3 Radiother apy in fir st-line tr eatmen t of diffuse 
large B-c ell lymphoma 
In people pr esenting wit h diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma and sit es of bulky disease, ar e 
outcomes impr oved by radiot herap y to those sit es following a full course of 
chemot herap y? 
Why this is im portant 
The r ole of radiot herap y to sites of original bulky disease in tr eating diffuse lar ge B-cell 
lymphoma is uncer tain. Some clinical t eams will consider radiot herap y in t his setting while 
others will not because of concerns about morbidity and lat e eff ects of tr eatment. In a 
recent randomised trial of chemot herap y in people o ver 60  years old wit h diffuse lar ge 
B-cell lymphoma, people ha ving radiot herap y were identified and compar ed wit h a cohor t 
having no radiot herap y. Significant impr ovement s in e vent-free, pr ogression-fr ee and 
overall sur vival were seen in t he gr oup ha ving radiot herap y. These r esult s have 
encouraged some t eams t o reconsider radiot herap y for bulky diffuse lar ge B-cell 
lymphoma. A definitiv e randomised trial is needed t o addr ess t his question. Out comes of Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 25 of
30
interest include o verall sur vival, disease-fr ee sur vival, pr ogression-fr ee sur vival, 
treatment -related mor tality , treatment -related morbidity , healt h-related quality of lif e, 
patient satisf action, patient pr eference and o verall r esponse rat e (complet e or par tial 
remission). Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 26 of
30
Context 
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is t he sixt h most common cancer in t he UK. Ther e are man y 
different subtypes of t he disease, wit h mark edly diff erent clinical courses and 
requir ement s for therap y. Diagnosing non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and identifying t he pr ecise 
subtype is challenging, and optimising t he diagnostic pr ocess is central t o impr oved 
management. Significant impr ovement s in our understanding of t he biology of 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma ha ve contribut ed to impr oved diagnosis and also allo wed for 
more tar geted therapies. 
The tr eatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma has been a beacon f or the de velopment of 
specific tr eatment strat egies (no w applied t o man y other f orms of cancer), but 
parado xically t here is a paucity of lar ge randomised clinical trials t o define best practice in 
treating t he various subtypes. As a consequence t here are considerable diff erences 
betw een centr es and countries in t he wa ys in which some subtypes of t he disease ar e 
diagnosed and managed. 
Ther e have been some impr ovement s in out come f or people wit h non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma in t he last decade, but t hese ha ve been r elativ ely modest and t here is still a 
need f or impr ovement. This is a rapidly de veloping field, wit h a number of new t herapies 
proving t o be e xciting in initial studies. It is t oo soon, ho wever, to judge t heir long-t erm 
impact, and ongoing assessment of t hese new agent s compar ed wit h standar d therap y 
will be needed. 
This guideline co vers adult s and y oung people (16  years and older) who ar e referred to 
secondar y car e wit h suspect ed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, or who ha ve newly diagnosed 
or relapsed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. It addr esses a number of ar eas wher e there is 
uncer tainty or v ariation in clinical practice, in r elation t o diagnosing non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma and management of t he subtypes at diff erent times in t he course of t he 
disease. It is not int ended as a compr ehensiv e guide t o diagnosing and tr eating 
lymphomas. T opics include t he best type of biopsy f or diagnosis, genetic t esting, t he role 
of FDG-PET -CT imaging in staging, patient inf ormation needs and sur vivorship. 
Management of t he mor e common subtypes is co vered: t hat is, f ollicular lymphoma, MAL T 
lymphoma, mant le cell lymphoma, diffuse lar ge B-cell lymphoma, Burkitt lymphoma and 
peripheral T -cell lymphoma. 
This guideline aims t o facilitat e standar disation of practice in tr eating non-Hodgkin's Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 27 of
30
lymphoma. But because of t he rapid de velopment of new t herapies as a r esult of impr oved 
understanding of t he biology of t he disease, continual r e-evaluation will be essential. Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 28 of
30
Finding mor e inf orma tion and c ommi ttee 
details 
To find NICE guidance on r elated topics, including guidance in de velopment, see t he NICE 
topic pages on blood and bone marr ow cancers  and complications of cancer . 
For full details of t he evidence and t he guideline committ ee's discussions, see t he full 
guideline . You can also find inf ormation about how the guideline was de veloped , including 
details of t he committ ee. 
NICE has pr oduced tools and r esour ces t o help y ou put t his guideline int o practice . For 
general help and advice on putting our guidelines int o practice, see resour ces t o help y ou 
put NICE guidance int o practice . Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 29 of
30
Update inf orma tion 
Minor changes since publication 
October 2021:  We added links t o HIV in Eur ope's HIV indicat or conditions  and NICE's 
guideline on HIV t esting t o section 1 .1 on diagnosis. See t he surveillance r epor t on HIV 
indicat or conditions  for mor e information. 
ISBN: 9 78-1-47 31-1963-5 Non-Hodgkin’ s lymphoma: diagnosis and management (NG52)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 30 of
30
