Colorectal c ancer 
NICE guideline 
Published: 29 Januar y 2020 
Last updat ed: 15 December 2021 
www .nice.or g.uk/guidance/ng151 
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).
Your r esponsi bility 
The r ecommendations in t his guideline r epresent t he view of NICE, arriv ed at aft er car eful 
consideration of t he evidence a vailable. When e xercising t heir judgement, pr ofessionals 
and practitioners ar e expect ed to tak e this guideline fully int o account, alongside t he 
individual needs, pr eferences and v alues of t heir patient s or t he people using t heir ser vice. 
It is not mandat ory to apply t he recommendations, and t he guideline does not o verride t he 
responsibility t o mak e decisions appr opriat e to the cir cumstances of t he individual, in 
consultation wit h them and t heir f amilies and car ers or guar dian. 
All pr oblems (adv erse e vents) related to a medicine or medical de vice used f or treatment 
or in a pr ocedur e should be r epor ted to the Medicines and Healt hcare product s Regulat ory 
Agency using t he Yellow Car d Scheme . 
Local commissioners and pr oviders of healt hcare have a responsibility t o enable t he 
guideline t o be applied when individual pr ofessionals and people using ser vices wish t o 
use it. The y should do so in t he cont ext of local and national priorities f or funding and 
developing ser vices, and in light of t heir duties t o have due r egar d to the need t o eliminat e 
unlawful discrimination, t o adv ance equality of oppor tunity and t o reduce healt h 
inequalities. Not hing in t his guideline should be int erpreted in a wa y that w ould be 
inconsist ent wit h complying wit h those duties. 
Commissioners and pr oviders ha ve a responsibility t o promot e an en vironmentally 
sustainable healt h and car e syst em and should assess and r educe t he en vironmental 
impact of implementing NICE r ecommendations  wher ever possible. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 of
48
Contents 
Overview ..................................................................................................................................... 5 
Who is it f or? ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
Recommendations ...................................................................................................................... 6 
1.1 Reduction in risk of color ectal cancer in people wit h Lynch syndr ome ..................................... 6 
1.2 Inf ormation f or people wit h color ectal cancer ............................................................................. 7 
1.3 Management of local disease ....................................................................................................... 9 
1.4 Molecular biomark ers t o guide syst emic anti-cancer t herap y .................................................. 17 
1.5 Management of metastatic disease ............................................................................................. 17 
1.6 Ongoing car e and suppor t ............................................................................................................. 21 
Terms used in t his guideline ................................................................................................................ 22 
Recommendations f or resear ch ................................................................................................ 24 
1 Treatment f or metastatic color ectal cancer in t he lung ................................................................. 24 
2 Management of lo w ant erior r esection syndr ome ......................................................................... 24 
Rationale and impact .................................................................................................................. 25 
Prevention of color ectal cancer in people wit h Lynch syndr ome .................................................... 25 
Information f or people wit h color ectal cancer .................................................................................. 26 
Treatment f or people wit h early r ectal cancer .................................................................................. 27 
Preoperativ e treatment f or people wit h rectal cancer ..................................................................... 28 
Surgery for people wit h rectal cancer ................................................................................................ 29 
Surgical t echnique f or people wit h rectal cancer ............................................................................. 30 
People wit h locally adv anced or r ecurr ent r ectal cancer ................................................................. 31 
Surgical v olumes f or rectal cancer operations .................................................................................. 32 
Preoperativ e treatment f or people wit h colon cancer ...................................................................... 33 
Duration of adjuv ant chemot herap y for people wit h color ectal cancer ......................................... 34 
Colonic st ents in acut e large bo wel obstruction ............................................................................... 36 
Molecular biomark ers t o guide syst emic anti-cancer t herap y ........................................................ 37 
People wit h asympt omatic primar y tumour ....................................................................................... 38 Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 3 of
48
Systemic anti-cancer t herap y for people wit h metastatic color ectal cancer ................................ 38 
People wit h metastatic color ectal cancer in t he liv er ....................................................................... 39 
People wit h metastatic color ectal cancer in t he lung ....................................................................... 40 
People wit h metastatic color ectal cancer in t he perit oneum .......................................................... 41 
Follow-up f or det ection of local r ecurr ence and distant metastases ............................................. 42 
Management of lo w ant erior r esection syndr ome ............................................................................ 43 
Cont ext ........................................................................................................................................ 45 
Finding mor e information and committ ee details .................................................................... 47 
Updat e information .................................................................................................................... 48 Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 4 of
48
This guideline r eplaces CG131 , CSG5 and T A93. 
This guideline is t he basis of QS20 . 
Overview 
This guideline co vers managing color ectal (bo wel) cancer in people aged 18 and o ver. It 
aims t o impr ove quality of lif e and sur vival for adult s wit h color ectal cancer t hrough 
management of local disease and secondar y tumours (metastatic disease). 
Who is i t for? 
• Healt hcare professionals 
• Cancer Alliances Commissioners of color ectal cancer pr eventativ e and tr eatment 
services (including Clinical Commissioning Gr oups and NHS England Specialised 
Commissioning) 
• People wit h color ectal cancer and t heir f amilies and car ers Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 5 of
48
Recommenda tions 
People ha ve the right t o be in volved in discussions and mak e informed decisions 
about t heir car e, as described in NICE's inf ormation on making decisions about y our 
care. 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines  explains ho w we use w ords to sho w the 
strengt h (or cer tainty) of our r ecommendations, and has inf ormation about 
prescribing medicines (including off -label use), pr ofessional guidelines, standar ds 
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and saf eguar ding. 
1.1 Reduction in risk o f colorectal c ancer in pe ople 
with Lynch syndr ome 
1.1.1 Consider daily aspirin, t o be tak en for mor e than 2  years, t o reduce t he risk of 
color ectal cancer in people wit h Lynch syndr ome. 
In Januar y 2020 t his was an off -label use of aspirin. See NICE's inf ormation on 
prescribing medicines . 
NICE has pr oduced a patient decision aid t o suppor t discussions about taking 
aspirin . 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on pr evention of 
color ectal cancer in people wit h Lynch syndr ome. 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview A 1: 
effectiv eness of aspirin in t he pr evention of color ectal cancer in people wit h Lynch 
syndr ome. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 6 of
48
1.2 Informa tion f or pe ople wi th colorectal c ancer 
1.2.1 Provide people wit h color ectal cancer inf ormation about t heir tr eatment (bot h 
writt en and spok en) in a sensitiv e and timely manner t hroughout t heir car e, 
tailor ed to their needs and cir cumstances. Mak e sur e the inf ormation is r elevant 
to them, based on t he tr eatment t hey might ha ve and t he possible side eff ects. 
Also see t he NICE guidelines on patient e xperience in adult NHS ser vices  and 
decision-making and mental capacity . 
1.2.2 Give people inf ormation on all tr eatment options f or color ectal cancer a vailable t o 
them, including: 
• surgery, radiot herap y, syst emic anti-cancer t herap y or palliativ e car e 
• the pot ential benefit s, risks, side eff ects and implications of tr eatment s, for 
example, possible eff ects on bo wel and se xual function (see also 
recommendation 1 .6.2 in t he section on management of lo w ant erior 
resection syndr ome), quality of lif e and independence. 
1.2.3 Advise people wit h color ectal cancer of possible r easons wh y their tr eatment 
plan might need t o change during t heir car e, including: 
• changes fr om lapar oscopic t o open sur gery or curativ e to non-curativ e 
treatment, and wh y this change ma y be t he most suitable option f or them 
• the lik elihood of ha ving a st oma, wh y it might be necessar y and f or ho w long 
it might be needed. 
1.2.4 If recovery protocols  (such as 'enhanced r ecovery aft er sur gery', ERAS) ar e used, 
explain t o people wit h color ectal cancer what t hese in volve and t heir v alue in 
improving t heir r ecovery aft er sur gery. 
1.2.5 Ensur e that appr opriat e specialist s discuss possible side eff ects wit h people who 
have had sur gery for color ectal cancer , including: 
• altered bo wel, urinar y and se xual function 
• physical changes, including anal dischar ge or bleeding. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 7 of
48
If relevant, ha ve a trained st oma pr ofessional pr ovide inf ormation on t he car e 
and management of st omas and on learning t o live wit h a st oma. 
1.2.6 Emphasise t o people t he impor tance of monit oring and managing side eff ects 
during non-sur gical tr eatment t o try to prevent permanent damage (f or example, 
monit oring pr olonged sensor y sympt oms aft er platinum-based chemot herap y 
treatment, which can be a sign t hat t he dose needs t o be r educed t o minimise 
futur e permanent peripheral neur opat hy). 
1.2.7 Give people who ha ve had tr eatment s for color ectal cancer inf ormation about 
possible shor t-term, long-t erm, permanent and lat e side eff ects which can aff ect 
quality of lif e, including: 
• pain 
• altered bo wel, urinar y or se xual function 
• nerve damage and neur opat hy 
• mental and emotional changes, including anxiety , depr ession, chemot herap y-
related cognitiv e impairment, and changes t o self -perception and social 
identity . 
1.2.8 Prepar e people f or dischar ge aft er treatment f or color ectal cancer b y giving t hem 
advice on: 
• adapting ph ysical activity t o maintain t heir quality of lif e 
• diet, including advice on f oods t hat can cause or contribut e to bowel 
problems such as diarrhoea, flatulence, incontinence and difficulty in 
emptying t he bo wels 
• weight management, ph ysical activity and healt hy lifestyle choices (f or 
example st opping smoking and r educing alcohol use) 
• how long t heir r ecovery might tak e 
• how, when and wher e to seek help if side eff ects become pr oblematic. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 8 of
48
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on inf ormation f or 
people wit h color ectal cancer . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview E3: 
information needs of people prior , during and aft er treatment f or color ectal cancer . 
1.3 M anag emen t of loc al dise ase 
People wi th rectal c ancer 
Treatment f or people wit h early r ectal cancer ( cT1-T2, cN0 , M0) 
1.3.1 Offer one of t he tr eatment s sho wn in table  1 to people wit h early r ectal cancer 
(cT1-T2, cN0 , M0) after discussing t he implications of each tr eatment and 
reaching a shar ed decision wit h the person about t he best option. 
Table 1 Implications of tr eatment s for early r ectal cancer ( cT1-T2, cN0 , M0) 
- Transanal e xcision (T AE), 
including tr ansanal minimally 
invasiv e sur gery (TAMIS) and 
transanal endoscopic 
micr osur gery (TEMS) Endoscopic 
submucosal 
dissection (ESD) Total mesor ectal 
excision (TME) 
Type of pr ocedur e Endoscopic/Sur gery Endoscopic Surgery 
Minimally in vasive procedur e Yes Yes Possible 
Resection of bo wel (ma y have 
more impact on se xual and bo wel 
function) No No Yes 
Stoma needed (a permanent or 
temporar y opening in t he 
abdomen f or wast e to pass 
through) No No Possible Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 9 of
48
- Transanal e xcision (T AE), 
including tr ansanal minimally 
invasiv e sur gery (TAMIS) and 
transanal endoscopic 
micr osur gery (TEMS) Endoscopic 
submucosal 
dissection (ESD) Total mesor ectal 
excision (TME) 
General anaest hetic needed (and 
the possibility of associat ed 
complications) Yes No, 
conscious 
sedation Yes 
Able t o do a full t hickness 
excision (bett er chance of 
removing cancer ous cells and 
more accurat e prediction of 
lymph node in volvement) Yes No Yes 
Removal of lymph nodes (mor e 
accurat e staging of t he cancer 
so bett er chance of cur e) No No Yes 
Conversion t o mor e invasive 
surgery needed if complication Possible Possible Possible 
Further sur gery needed 
depending on hist ology Possible Possible Usually no 
Usual hospital sta y 1 to 2 da ys 1 to 2 da ys 5 to 7 da ys 
External scarring No No Yes Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 10 of
48
- Transanal e xcision (T AE), 
including tr ansanal minimally 
invasiv e sur gery (TAMIS) and 
transanal endoscopic 
micr osur gery (TEMS) Endoscopic 
submucosal 
dissection (ESD) Total mesor ectal 
excision (TME) 
Possible complications include 
(in alphabetical or der) Abdominal pain 
Bleeding 
Mild anal incontinence 
Perirectal abscess/
sepsis and strictur e 
(narr owing) 
Perforation 
Sutur e line dehiscence 
(wound r eopening) 
Urinar y retention Abdominal 
pain 
Bleeding 
Bloating 
Perforation Adhesions 
Anast omotic 
leak (leaking 
of bo wel 
contents into 
the abdomen) 
Anast omotic 
strictur e 
(narr owing at 
internal 
operation sit e) 
Bleeding 
Incisional 
hernia (hernia 
wher e the 
surgical 
incision was 
made) 
Injury to 
neighbouring 
structur es 
Pelvic abscess 
Urinar y 
retention 
Some of t he pot ential complications sho wn in t he table w ere identified fr om t he evidence 
review , others based on committ ee's e xper tise. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 11 of
48
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on tr eatment f or 
people wit h early r ectal cancer . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview C1: 
treatment f or early r ectal cancer . 
Preoper ative treatment f or people wit h rectal cancer 
1.3.2 Do not off er pr eoperativ e radiot herap y to people wit h early r ectal cancer ( cT1-T2 
cN0, M0), unless as par t of a clinical trial. 
1.3.3 Offer pr eoperativ e radiot herap y or chemoradiot herap y to people wit h rectal 
cancer t hat is cT1-T2, cN1-N2, M0 , or cT3-T4, any cN, M0 . 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on pr eoperativ e 
treatment f or people wit h rectal cancer . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview C1: 
treatment f or early r ectal cancer  and evidence r eview C2: pr eoperativ e radiot herap y 
and chemoradiot herap y for rectal cancer . 
Surgery for people wit h rectal cancer 
1.3.4 Offer sur gery to people wit h rectal cancer ( cT1-T2, cN1-N2, M0 , or cT3-T4, any 
cN, M0 ) who ha ve a resectable tumour . 
1.3.5 Inform people wit h a complet e clinical and radiological r esponse t o neoadjuv ant 
treatment who wish t o def er sur gery that t here is a risk of r ecurr ence, and t here 
are no pr ognostic f actors t o guide selection f or def erral of sur gery. For those who 
choose t o def er, encourage t heir par ticipation in a clinical trial and ensur e that 
data is collect ed via a national r egistr y. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 12 of
48
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on sur gery for people 
with rectal cancer . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview C4: 
deferral of sur gery in people ha ving neoadjuv ant t herap y for rectal cancer . 
Surgical t echnique f or people wit h rectal cancer 
1.3.6 Offer lapar oscopic sur gery for rectal cancer , in line wit h NICE's t echnology 
appraisal guidance on lapar oscopic sur gery for color ectal cancer . 
1.3.7 Consider open sur gery if clinically indicat ed, for example b y locally adv anced 
tumours, multiple pr evious abdominal operations or pr evious pelvic sur gery. 
1.3.8 Only consider r obotic sur gery wit hin established pr ogrammes t hat ha ve 
appr opriat e audit ed out comes. 
1.3.9 Only consider transanal t otal mesor ectal e xcision (TME) sur gery in t he cont ext of 
resear ch in line wit h the NICE int erventional pr ocedur es guidance on transanal 
total mesor ectal e xcision f or rectal cancer . [amended 2021] 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on sur gical t echnique 
for people wit h rectal cancer . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview C3: 
optimal sur gical t echnique f or rectal cancer . 
People wit h locally adv anced or r ecurr ent r ectal cancer 
1.3.10 Consider r eferring people wit h locally adv anced primar y or r ecurr ent r ectal 
cancer t hat might pot entially need multi-visceral or beyond-TME sur gery to a 
specialist centr e to discuss e xenterativ e sur gery. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 13 of
48
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on locally adv anced 
or recurr ent r ectal cancer . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview C5: 
effectiv eness of e xenterativ e sur gery for locally adv anced or r ecurr ent r ectal cancer . 
Surgical v olumes f or rectal cancer oper ations 
1.3.11 Hospitals per forming major r esection f or rectal cancer  should per form at least 
10 of these operations each y ear. 
1.3.12 Individual sur geons per forming major r esection f or rectal cancer should per form 
at least 5  of these operations each y ear. 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on sur gical v olumes 
for rectal cancer operations . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview F1: 
surgical v olumes and out comes f or rectal cancer . 
People wi th colon c ancer 
Preoper ative treatment f or people wit h colon cancer 
1.3.13 Consider pr eoperativ e syst emic anti-cancer t herap y for people wit h cT4 colon 
cancer . Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 14 of
48
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on pr eoperativ e 
treatment f or people wit h colon cancer . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview C7 : 
preoperativ e chemot herap y for non-metastatic colon cancer . 
Surgical t echnique f or people wit h colon cancer 
For advice on lapar oscopic sur gery see NICE's t echnology appraisal guidance on 
lapar oscopic sur gery for color ectal cancer . 
People wi th ei ther c olon or r ectal c ancer 
Duration of adjuv ant chemot herapy for people wit h color ectal cancer 
Patient s wit h rectal cancer tr eated wit h long-course chemoradiot herap y are not co vered 
by this recommendation. 
1.3.14 For people wit h stage III colon cancer ( pT1-4 , pN1- 2, M0 ), or stage III r ectal 
cancer ( pT1-4 , pN1- 2, M0 ) treated wit h shor t-course radiot herap y or no 
preoperativ e treatment, off er: 
• capecitabine in combination wit h oxaliplatin (CAPO X) for 3 mont hs, or if t his 
is not suitable 
• oxaliplatin in combination wit h 5-fluor ouracil and f olinic acid (FOLFO X) for 
3 to 6 mont hs, or 
• single-agent fluor opyrimidine (f or example, capecitabine) f or 6 mont hs, in line 
with NICE t echnology appraisal guidance (see t he NICE t echnology appraisal 
guidance on our t opic page on color ectal cancer ). 
Base t he choice on t he person's hist opat hology (f or example pT1-T3 and 
pN1, and pT4 and/or pN2 ), per formance status, an y comorbidities, age and 
personal pr eferences. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 15 of
48
In Januar y 2020 , the use of some tr eatment s was off label: 
• oxaliplatin in combination wit h capecitabine (t hough CAPO X is common in UK 
clinical practice) 
• capecitabine f or 3 mont hs duration of adjuv ant tr eatment in people wit h 
colon cancer 
• CAPO X and FOLFO X in stage III r ectal cancer . 
See NICE's inf ormation on pr escribing medicines . 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on duration of 
adjuv ant chemot herap y for people wit h color ectal cancer . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview C8: 
optimal duration of adjuv ant chemot herap y for color ectal cancer . 
Colonic st ents in acut e lar ge bo wel obstruction 
1.3.15 Consider st enting f or people pr esenting wit h acut e left -sided lar ge bo wel 
obstruction who ar e to be tr eated wit h palliativ e intent. 
1.3.16 Offer eit her st enting or emer gency sur gery for people pr esenting wit h acut e left -
sided lar ge bo wel obstruction if pot entially curativ e treatment is suitable f or 
them. 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on colonic st ents in 
acute large bo wel obstruction . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview C9: 
effectiv eness of st enting f or acut e large bo wel obstruction . Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 16 of
48
1.4 M olecular biomar kers to guide systemic an ti-
cancer ther apy 
Also see t he NICE diagnostics guidance on molecular t esting strat egies f or Lynch 
syndr ome in people wit h color ectal cancer . 
1.4.1 Test for RAS and BRAF  V600E mutations in all people wit h metastatic color ectal 
cancer suitable f or syst emic anti-cancer tr eatment. 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on molecular 
biomark ers t o guide syst emic anti-cancer t herap y. 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview B1: 
use of molecular biomark ers t o guide syst emic t herap y. 
1.5 M anag emen t of me tasta tic dise ase 
People wi th asym ptoma tic primar y tumour 
1.5.1 Consider sur gical r esection of t he primar y tumour f or people wit h incurable 
metastatic color ectal cancer who ar e receiving syst emic anti-cancer t herap y and 
have an asympt omatic primar y tumour . Discuss t he implications of t he tr eatment 
options wit h the person bef ore making a shar ed decision. See table  2. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 17 of
48
Table 2 F actors t o tak e int o account when considering r esection of t he asympt omatic 
primar y tumour 
- Advantages Disadv antages 
Resection of 
the 
asympt omatic 
primar y 
tumour Possible impr ovement 
in overall sur vival rat e 
(based on lo w quality 
evidence fr om 
resear ch) 
Avoidance of primar y 
tumour -related 
sympt oms such as 
obstruction, 
perforation, bleeding 
and pain Around 5 in 100 people will ha ve severe 
postoperativ e complications (based on 
moderat e quality e vidence fr om resear ch) 
Systemic t herap y still needed, and ma y be 
delayed if sur gical complications occur 
No resection 
(syst emic 
anti-cancer 
therap y only) Avoids sur gery and t he 
potential f or 
postoperativ e 
complications Around 20 in 100 people will de velop primar y 
tumour -related sympt oms such as 
obstruction, per foration, bleeding and pain 
that need sur gery (based on lo w quality 
evidence fr om resear ch) 
Advantages and disadv antages in table 2 ar e based on committ ee exper tise unless 
otherwise indicat ed. 
Quality of e vidence (based on grading of r ecommendations, assessment, de velopment 
and e valuations [GRADE]): 
• Moderat e: true eff ect is pr obably close t o the estimat ed eff ect. 
• Low: true eff ect might be mark edly diff erent fr om t he estimat ed eff ect. 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on asympt omatic 
primar y tumour . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview D1: 
surgery for asympt omatic primar y tumour . Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 18 of
48
Systemic an ti-cancer ther apy for pe ople wi th me tasta tic 
colorectal c ancer 
1.5.2 For advice on syst emic anti-cancer t herap y for people wit h metastatic cancer , 
see NICE t echnology appraisal guidance on our t opic page on color ectal cancer . 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on syst emic anti-
cancer t herap y for people wit h metastatic color ectal cancer . 
Genomic biomar ker-base d treatmen t 
The point at which t o use genomic biomark er-based t herap y in solid tumour tr eatment 
pathways is uncer tain. See the NICE t opic page on genomic biomark er-based cancer 
treatment s for guidance on specific tr eatment s. 
People wi th me tasta tic c olorectal c ancer in the li ver 
1.5.3 Consider r esection, eit her simultaneous or sequential, aft er discussion b y a 
multidisciplinar y team wit h exper tise in r esection of disease in all in volved sit es. 
1.5.4 Consider perioperativ e syst emic anti-cancer t herap y if liv er resection is a suitable 
treatment. 
1.5.5 Consider chemot herap y wit h local ablativ e techniques f or people wit h color ectal 
liver metastases t hat ar e unsuitable f or liv er resection aft er discussion b y a 
specialist multidisciplinar y team. 
1.5.6 Do not off er selectiv e internal radiation t herap y (SIRT) as first -line tr eatment f or 
people wit h color ectal liv er metastases t hat ar e unsuitable f or local tr eatment. 
See t he NICE int erventional pr ocedur es guidance on selectiv e internal radiation 
therap y for unr esectable color ectal metastases in t he liv er, which r ecommends 
that SIRT should only be off ered: 
• with special arrangement s for clinical go vernance, consent, and audit or 
resear ch to people who ar e chemot herap y intolerant or who ha ve liver Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 19 of
48
metastases t hat ar e refract ory to chemot herap y 
• in the cont ext of r esear ch to people who can ha ve chemot herap y. 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on metastatic 
color ectal cancer in t he liv er. 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview 
D2a: tr eatment f or metastatic color ectal cancer in t he liv er amenable t o treatment 
with curativ e intent and evidence r eview D2b: optimal combination and sequence of 
treatment s in patient s presenting wit h metastatic color ectal cancer in t he liv er not 
amenable t o treatment wit h curativ e intent. 
People wi th me tasta tic c olorectal c ancer in the lung 
1.5.7 Consider metastasect omy, ablation or st ereotactic body radiation t herap y for 
people wit h lung metastases t hat ar e suitable f or local tr eatment, aft er discussion 
by a multidisciplinar y team t hat includes a t horacic sur geon and a specialist in 
non-sur gical ablation. 
1.5.8 Consider biopsy f or people wit h a single lung lesion t o exclude primar y lung 
cancer . 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on metastatic 
color ectal cancer in t he lung . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview D3: 
treatment f or metastatic color ectal cancer in t he lung amenable t o local tr eatment . 
People wi th me tasta tic c olorectal c ancer in the peri toneum 
1.5.9 For people wit h color ectal cancer metastases limit ed to the perit oneum: Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 20 of
48
• offer syst emic anti-cancer t herap y and 
• within a multidisciplinar y team, discuss r eferral t o a nationally commissioned 
specialist centr e to consider cyt oreductiv e sur gery and h yper thermic 
intraperit oneal chemot herap y (HIPEC). 
See also NICE's int erventional pr ocedur es guidance on cyt oreductiv e sur gery 
with HIPEC f or perit oneal car cinomat osis. 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on metastatic 
color ectal cancer in t he perit oneum . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview D4: 
local and syst emic tr eatment s for metastatic color ectal cancer isolat ed in t he 
perit oneum . 
1.6 Ong oing c are and suppor t 
Follow-up f or de tection o f loc al recurr ence and distan t 
metastases 
1.6.1 For people who ha ve had pot entially curativ e sur gical tr eatment f or non-
metastatic color ectal cancer , offer follow-up f or det ection of local r ecurr ence and 
distant metastases f or the first 3  years. F ollow-up should include serum 
carcinoembr yonic antigen (CEA) and CT scan of t he chest, abdomen and pelvis. 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on f ollow-up f or 
detection of local r ecurr ence and distant metastases . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview E1: 
follow-up t o det ect r ecurr ence aft er treatment f or non-metastatic color ectal cancer . Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 21 of
48
Manag emen t of low an terior r esection syndr ome 
1.6.2 Give information on lo w ant erior r esection syndr ome (L ARS) t o people who will 
potentially ha ve sphinct er-preserving sur gery. Advise t hem t o seek help fr om 
primar y car e if t hey think t hey have sympt oms of L ARS, such as: 
• increased fr equency of st ool 
• urgency wit h or wit hout incontinence of st ool 
• feeling of incomplet e emptying 
• fragmentation of st ool (passing small amount s little and oft en) 
• difficulty in diff erentiating betw een gas and st ool. 
1.6.3 Assess people wit h sympt oms of L ARS using a v alidat ed patient -administ ered 
questionnair e (for example, t he Low Ant erior R esection Syndr ome scor e (LARS 
score), at t he Eur opean Society of Colopr octology ). 
1.6.4 Offer people wit h bowel dysfunction tr eatment f or associat ed sympt oms in 
primar y car e (such as dietar y management, laxativ es, anti-bulking agent s, anti-
diarrhoeal agent s, or anti-spasmodic agent s). Seek advice fr om secondar y car e if 
the tr eatment is not successful. 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t hese r ecommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice, see t he rationale and impact section on management of 
low ant erior r esection syndr ome. 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview E2: 
optimal management of lo w ant erior r esection syndr ome. 
Terms use d in this guideline 
This section defines t erms t hat ha ve been used in a specific wa y for this guideline. F or 
general definitions, please see t he NICE glossar y. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 22 of
48
Beyond-TME sur gery 
Beyond t otal mesor ectal e xcision (TME) sur gery is when t he tumour e xtends be yond what 
is achie vable t o resect b y TME and needs mor e extensiv e sur gery to achie ve clear 
margins. 
Major r esection f or rectal c ancer 
Major r esection f or rectal cancer means a sur gical operation when par t or all of t he rectum 
is removed, including ant erior r esection and abdominoperineal r esection. 
Recovery protoc ols 
Recovery protocols, such as 'enhanced r ecovery aft er sur gery' (ERAS), ar e perioperativ e 
care pat hways designed t o promot e early r ecovery for patient s under going major sur gery 
by optimising t he person's healt h bef ore sur gery and maintaining healt h and functioning 
after sur gery. 
Social iden tity 
Social identity is about changes t o people's concept of t hemselv es as a r esult of eit her 
their cancer , or t he long-t erm side eff ects from tr eatment. F or example, it could co ver 
changes fr om being a pr eviously fit person t o someone who has ph ysical or mental healt h 
problems, fr om being someone wit h the expectation of y ears t o live to someone wit h a 
limited lif e expectancy , or t he change fr om being a car er to becoming car ed for. 
TNM classific ation 
This guideline uses t he tumour , node, metastasis (TNM) classification de veloped b y the 
Union f or Int erventional Cancer Contr ol (UICC) t o describe t he stage of t he cancer . Please 
refer to The TNM Classification of Malignant T umours, 8t h Edition f or fur ther inf ormation. 
In this guideline early r ectal cancer is defined as c T1-2, cN0 , M0. cTNM r efers t o clinical 
classification based on e vidence acquir ed bef ore treatment, f or example imaging, ph ysical 
examination and endoscop y. pTNM r efers t o pat hological classification based on 
histopat hology . Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 23 of
48
Recommenda tions f or research 
The guideline committ ee has made t he following r ecommendations f or resear ch. 
1 Treatmen t for me tasta tic c olorectal c ancer in the 
lung 
What is t he cost eff ectiv eness and saf ety of non-sur gical ablation and st ereotactic body 
radiot herap y compar ed to resection f or people wit h metastatic color ectal cancer in t he 
lung amenable t o local tr eatment? 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t he recommendation f or resear ch, 
see t he rationale on people wit h metastatic color ectal cancer in t he lung . 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview D3: 
treatment f or metastatic color ectal cancer in t he lung amenable t o local tr eatment . 
2 Manag emen t of low an terior r esection syndr ome 
What is t he eff ectiv eness and saf ety of sacral ner ve stimulation and transanal irrigation 
compar ed to sympt omatic tr eatment f or people wit h major lo w ant erior r esection 
syndr ome? 
For a shor t explanation of wh y the committ ee made t he recommendation f or resear ch, 
see t he rationale on management of lo w ant erior r esection syndr ome. 
Full details of t he evidence and t he committ ee's discussion ar e in evidence r eview E2: 
optimal management of lo w ant erior r esection syndr ome. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 4 of
48
Rationale and im pact 
These sections briefly e xplain wh y the committ ee made t he recommendations and ho w 
they might aff ect practice. The y link t o details of t he evidence and a full description of t he 
committ ee's discussion. 
Prevention o f colorectal c ancer in pe ople wi th 
Lynch syndr ome 
Recommendation 1 .1.1 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
Evidence fr om a multi-countr y randomised contr olled trial sho wed that taking 600  mg of 
aspirin daily f or mor e than 2  years r educes t he risk of color ectal cancer in people wit h 
Lynch syndr ome, alt hough t his was only e vident when r estricting t he analysis t o those 
who actually t ook aspirin as planned, incr easing t he uncer tainty ar ound t he evidence. An 
obser vational study among people wit h Lynch syndr ome also sho wed a r educed risk of 
color ectal cancer in people who had tak en aspirin (v arying self -repor ted doses) in t he long 
term compar ed to those who had not. 
Long-t erm use of aspirin ma y slight ly incr ease t he risk of bleeding. Ho wever, no incr eased 
risk of peptic ulcer , gastr ointestinal bleeding or cer ebral haemorrhage was obser ved in t he 
randomised contr olled trial, alt hough t his might be because of t he relativ ely shor t follow-
up time. G iven that t he pot ential benefit s are likely to outw eigh t he pot ential harms f or 
most people wit h Lynch syndr ome, t he committ ee agr eed taking aspirin long t erm will be 
appr opriat e in most, but not all, cases (f or example in people wit h hist ory of peptic ulcers). 
The optimal dose of aspirin t hat balances t he benefit s of aspirin in pr eventing color ectal 
cancer and t he pot ential incr eased bleeding risk ( especially wit h higher doses) r emains 
unclear . Because of t his the committ ee was not able t o recommend a dose, t hough an 
ongoing trial is curr ently studying t his. Commonly used doses in curr ent practice ar e 
150 mg or 300  mg. 
In July 2020 , NICE carried out a surveillance r eview on a f ollow-up study t o the Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 25 of
48
randomised contr olled trial t hat was used t o inform de velopment of t he recommendation . 
The decision was t hat no change t o the recommended advice was needed at t his time. 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
Aspirin is alr eady widely used f or this indication and so t he recommendation is not 
expect ed to have a significant impact on practice. 
Return t o recommendation 
Informa tion f or pe ople wi th colorectal c ancer 
Recommendations 1 .2.1 to 1.2.8 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Ther e was e vidence t hat people ha ving tr eatment f or color ectal cancer need diff erent 
information at diff erent stages of t heir car e, and t his was suppor ted by the committ ee's 
own clinical e xperience as w ell as NICE's guideline on patient e xperience in adult NHS 
services . 
The committ ee based t heir r ecommendations on qualitativ e evidence and t heir clinical 
experience, which enabled t he committ ee to identify ar eas wher e people lack ed 
understanding and issues t hat people w ould v alue inf ormation on. This included e xplaining 
color ectal cancer and it s treatment s in dept h, including non-sur gical tr eatment options and 
palliativ e car e, as w ell as e xplaining ho w people can alt er their diet t o reduce bo wel 
problems and manage t heir w eight. 
The committ ee also agr eed it was impor tant t o prepar e people f or the fact t hat changes t o 
the agr eed plan ar e sometimes needed during tr eatment, and t o explain what t hese could 
be so t hat people f eel ready f or this possibility . 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
Current practice v aries betw een hospitals, so t hese r ecommendations aim t o reduce 
variation and encourage best practice. Ther e ma y be a cost t o providing training t o 
professionals but t his is e xpect ed to be small. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 26 of
48
Return t o recommendations 
Treatmen t for pe ople wi th early rectal c ancer 
Recommendation 1 .3.1 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
The committ ee agr eed t hat it was not possible t o recommend one tr eatment o ver anot her 
because of t he lo w quality of t he evidence and t he limit ed amount of e vidence a vailable. 
The a vailable e vidence sho wed no clinically impor tant diff erences betw een tr eatment s 
and, in addition, f or man y of t he out comes specified in t he pr otocol and a number of t he 
comparisons no e vidence was identified at all. Ho wever, based on t heir kno wledge and 
experience, t he committ ee not ed that t here are risks and benefit s associat ed wit h each 
treatment option. The y highlight ed that while t otal mesor ectal e xcision (TME) is a radical 
intervention and has mor e risks t han t he ot hers, it is t he only wa y to accurat ely stage 
lymph nodes and, b y doing so, allo w bett er treatment planning. Ther efore, the committ ee 
recommended discussing t he implications of each int ervention wit h the person bef ore 
making a choice. 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
Currently, endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is not widely a vailable in t he UK. In 
centr es wher e ESD is not alr eady a vailable, r esour ces and time w ould be needed t o 
provide t his ser vice, including pur chasing equipment and training staff (alt hough t his 
would be a shor t-term cost). Aft er this initial in vestment t here will be minimal cost 
difference betw een ESD and alt ernativ es. T ransanal e xcision (T AE; including transanal 
minimally in vasive sur gery and transanal endoscopic micr osurgery) and TME ar e curr ent 
practice in t he UK, so t he recommendations will ha ve a minimal eff ect f or these 
interventions. Ho wever, the recommendations will allo w for an inf ormed discussion wit h 
patient s so t hey are fully awar e of t he risks and benefit s of each pr ocedur e. 
Return t o recommendation Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 27 of
48
Preoper ative treatmen t for pe ople wi th rectal 
cancer 
Recommendations 1 .3.2 and 1 .3.3 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Ther e was no e vidence f or the eff ectiv eness of pr eoperativ e radiot herap y for people wit h 
early r ectal cancer , and based on t heir e xperience t he committ ee w ould not r ecommend 
preoperativ e radiot herap y. However, the ongoing ST AR-TREC trial, which is a multicentr e 
randomised contr olled trial, compar es radiot herap y to TME f or early r ectal cancer . 
Because of t his, t he committ ee recommended t hat pr eoperativ e radiot herap y for early 
rectal cancer could be off ered, but only in t he cont ext of a clinical trial. 
For rectal cancer c T1-T2, cN1-N2, M0 , or c T3-T4, any cN, M0 , the evidence fr om se veral 
randomised contr olled trials (RCT s) sho ws that people who ha ve preoperativ e 
radiot herap y or chemoradiot herap y have less local r ecurr ence and ha ve bett er overall and 
disease-fr ee sur vival compar ed to people who did not ha ve preoperativ e therap y. 
Although pr eoperativ e therap y can pot entially ha ve adv erse eff ects, from t he evidence t he 
committ ee did not find a diff erence in quality of lif e or tr eatment -related mor tality betw een 
those who did or did not r eceiv e preoperativ e therap y. 
The committ ee was not able t o mak e a recommendation on t he duration and type of 
radiot herap y or chemoradiot herap y because t he available e vidence did not sho w a 
difference betw een shor t-course and long-course radiot herap y, chemoradiot herap y wit h 
or wit hout induction chemot herap y, or int ernal radiot herap y wit h or wit hout e xternal 
radiot herap y and e xternal radiot herap y alone. 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
Ther e is some v ariation in curr ent practice among diff erent multidisciplinar y teams as t o 
who is off ered pr eoperativ e therap y. The aim of t he recommendation is t o standar dise 
treatment acr oss t he countr y, so t his might ha ve a resour ce impact in ar eas wher e 
preoperativ e therap y is not curr ently off ered and wher e mor e clinical oncologist s and 
radiot herap y equipment and staff will be needed. The committ ee was awar e that in some 
areas, t herapeutic radiographers ar e taking on r oles at adv anced and consultant le vel to 
suppor t specialist oncologist s. Ther e ma y be sa vings do wnstr eam t hrough r educed Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 28 of
48
recurr ence and incr eased disease-fr ee sur vival avoiding or dela ying e xpensiv e fur ther 
treatment. 
The r ecommendation might incr ease t he number of people off ered pr eoperativ e 
radiot herap y or chemoradiot herap y for lower-risk tumours (mainly cancers in t he upper 
and mid r ectum). In curr ent practice, people wit h cancer in t he upper and mid r ectum 
might not ha ve preoperativ e therap y because t here is a lo wer risk of r ecurr ence in cancers 
in these locations compar ed to cancer in t he lo w rectum. 
Return t o recommendations 
Surgery for pe ople wi th rectal c ancer 
Recommendations 1 .3.4 and 1 .3.5 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Surgery is t he gold standar d treatment f or people wit h rectal cancer ( cT1-T2, cN1-N2, M0 , 
or cT3-T4, any cN, M0) if t he tumour is r esectable. The committ ee ackno wledged t hat 
some people whose r ectal cancer sho ws a complet e clinical r esponse t o neoadjuv ant 
therap y choose t o def er sur gery and opt f or an or gan pr eserving 'wat ch-and-wait' 
strat egy inst ead. Ho wever, no e vidence was identified on which pr ognostic f actors could 
predict r ecurr ence and sur vival to bett er select people f or def erral of sur gery. The 
committ ee w ere uncer tain about ho w diff erent definitions of complet e clinical r esponse 
and diff erent wat ch-and-wait sur veillance pr otocols w ould impact risk of r ecurr ence. 
Because of t he lack of e vidence, t hey agr eed t hat people wishing t o def er sur gery aft er a 
complet e clinical and radiological r esponse t o neoadjuv ant tr eatment should be made 
awar e of t he uncer tainty about t heir out come. Ar ound one t hird of t hese people will 
experience local r egrowth of t heir tumour and need salv age sur gery. 
The committ ee not ed that t here is no agr eed definition of complet e clinical and 
radiological r esponse and no e vidence on f actors t hat pr edict r ecurr ence, t herefore, those 
who choose t o def er sur gery should be encouraged t o ent er a clinical trial or ent ered int o 
a national r egistr y. These could gat her e vidence t o help define gr oups f or whom def erral 
of sur gery ma y be saf e and appr opriat e. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 29 of
48
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
The wat ch-and-wait appr oach r equir es repeat ed sur veillance e xaminations and 
endoscopies t o monit or for tumour r egrowth. In some cases, people choosing t o def er 
surgery will need t o be r eferred to anot her centr e that can pr ovide t he necessar y wat ch-
and-wait sur veillance pr ogramme. The r ecommendations ar e not e xpect ed to have a 
significant impact on practice. 
Return t o recommendations 
Surgical te chnique f or pe ople wi th rectal c ancer 
Recommendations 1 .3.6 to 1.3.9 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
The clinical e vidence on t he diff erent sur gical t echniques f or rectal cancer sho wed that t he 
shor t- and long-t erm out comes of lapar oscopic t echnique w ere similar or bett er than of 
the open t echnique and t hat t here seemed t o be no diff erence in eff ectiv eness betw een 
lapar oscopic and r obotic t echniques. The committ ee agr eed t hat in addition t o the clinical 
effectiv eness it was impor tant t o consider t he cost s of t hese diff erent t echniques in or der 
to assess which t echnique is t he most cost -effectiv e appr oach in r ectal cancer sur gery, 
therefore, a healt h economic analysis was done. 
The e vidence sho wed that lapar oscopic sur gery is cost eff ectiv e compar ed to open 
surgery or r obotic sur gery. However, in some cases open sur gery might be clinically mor e 
appr opriat e and lapar oscopic sur gery might be less f easible, f or example because of 
scarring fr om pr evious operations or t echnically demanding r esection of adjacent or gans 
or structur es in locally adv anced tumours. 
Robotic sur gery was not f ound t o be cost eff ectiv e; ho wever, this technique could be 
consider ed in centr es that ha ve already in vested in a r obot and ha ve an established 
programme. These pr ogrammes should collect out come data in or der t o benchmark t he 
effectiv eness and saf ety of t his technique in clinical practice against ot her centr es and 
techniques. The t echniques and equipment of r obotic sur gery develop rapidly and mor e 
evidence on it s cost eff ectiv eness will be a vailable in t he futur e. 
Ther e is e vidence t hat transanal TME is eff ectiv e, but e vidence about it s saf ety is Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 30 of
48
inconsist ent. Ho wever, transanal TME could be consider ed as par t of a f ormal r esear ch 
study . Out come data should be submitt ed to a national r egistr y in or der t o assess t he 
safety and eff ectiv eness of t his technique in clinical practice. This is in line wit h NICE 
interventional pr ocedur es guidance on transanal t otal mesor ectal e xcision f or rectal 
cancer . 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
Ther e will be mor e lapar oscopic sur gery, while r ecognising t hat t here is a r ole for open 
surgery in appr opriat ely select ed cases. Curr ent r obotic t echniques w ere found not t o be 
cost eff ectiv e, so t here ma y be less in vestment in r obotic t echniques f or this indication. 
However, the recommendation will not aff ect t he use of r obotic sur gery wit hin established 
programmes. The r ecommendations ar e not e xpect ed to have an impact on t he use of 
transanal TME as t hese ar e largely done wit hin structur ed and super vised pr ogrammes in 
current practice. 
Return t o recommendations 
People wi th loc ally advanced or r ecurr ent rectal 
cancer 
Recommendation 1 .3.10 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
Based on t heir clinical e xperience, t he committ ee ackno wledged t hat man y patient s are 
not curr ently referred to specialist centr es and ar e only off ered palliativ e car e inst ead of 
potentially curativ e sur gery. The committ ee also not ed that pelvic e xenteration is a 
comple x and in vasive procedur e. 
However, there was some v ery low-quality e vidence t hat sho wed people who had pelvic 
exenteration had similar quality of lif e scor es to those who did not, and t hat t he pr ocedur e 
improved sur vival over 12  mont hs. The committ ee agr eed t hat e vidence fr om long-t erm 
follow-up of quality of lif e would help t o inform t he recommendation, but t here was no 
quality-of -life data a vailable be yond 12  mont hs. Ther efore, the committ ee could not 
recommend r eferring e veryone wit h locally adv anced or r ecurr ent r ectal cancer t o have 
pelvic e xenteration, but agr eed t hat people should ha ve the oppor tunity t o discuss pelvic Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 31 of
48
exenteration as an option in a specialist centr e. Despit e the lack of long-t erm quality of lif e 
evidence, a r esear ch recommendation was not made because t he lo w number of eligible 
participant s meant a pr ospectiv e comparativ e study w ould not be f easible. Additionally , an 
international collaborativ e study of out comes aft er pelvic e xenteration (P elvEx) is alr eady 
under way. 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
The r ecommendation could incr ease t he number of r eferrals t o specialist centr es in 
hospitals wher e this is not curr ent practice. This w ould, in turn, incr ease demand f or 
specialist time and mean t hat mor e people ma y go on t o have sur gery. However, this ma y 
improve quality of lif e and sur vival. 
Return t o recommendation 
Surgical volumes f or rectal c ancer oper ations 
Recommendations 1 .3.11 and 1 .3.12 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Currently, there is uncer tainty in t he clinical community about optimal hospital and 
surgeon v olumes f or rectal cancer out comes, wit h some clinicians adv ocating f or the 
centralisation of ser vices. Ther e was e vidence t hat when t he threshold is set betw een 
10 and 20 rectal cancer sur gery patient s per y ear, higher v olume hospitals ha ve bett er 
outcomes t han lo wer volume hospitals in t erms of o verall sur vival, local r ecurr ence, 
permanent st oma rat es and perioperativ e mor tality . Similarly , there was e vidence of 
benefit wit h a sur geon case v olume t hreshold of betw een 5  and 10 cases per y ear in t erms 
of resection mar gins, local r ecurr ence and permanent st oma rat es. 
The committ ee w ere cautious in t heir int erpretation of t he evidence: individual studies had 
used diff erent case v olume t hresholds and had not tr eated case v olume as a continuous 
outcome, and t here were additional comple xities wit h sur geon-le vel data (t hat is, 
consultant s ma y do mor e comple x operations, but f ewer of t hem, and a consultant might 
be in volved wit h other operations but not be t he named sur geon) as w ell as wit h hospital-
level data (t hat is, some studies w ere old and fr om out side t he UK, wit h inconsist ent 
staging acr oss studies). Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 32 of
48
Given the uncer tainties in t he data, t he committ ee agr eed t hat t he evidence was not 
strong enough t o recommend a minimum cut -off of 20  cases and inst ead decided t o 
recommend a mor e conser vative cut -off of 10  cases a y ear. 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect ser vices 
An audit of operations f or rectal cancer in t he UK has indicat ed that most hospitals in t he 
UK per form at least 20  cases of r ectal cancer sur gery per y ear. Ther efore, the 
recommendation f or a minimum t hreshold of 10  cases per y ear at hospital le vel will not 
have a lar ge impact on curr ent practice. Based on t heir clinical kno wledge, t he committ ee 
were awar e that some sur geons in t he UK curr ently per form f ewer than 5  operations per 
year, so t he recommendation could ha ve an impact on t hese sur geons. F ewer sur geons 
performing mor e cases could ha ve an impact on staffing, alt hough as t he overall number 
of operations will be t he same t he overall cost impact should be neutral. Ther e ma y be an 
increase in t he distance patient s need t o tra vel for sur gery and t his will ha ve a cost impact 
on the NHS wher e this is r eimbursed. This cost will be off set b y bett er sur gical out comes 
reducing car e-related cost s later on and incr easing quality of lif e. 
Return t o recommendations 
Preoper ative treatmen t for pe ople wi th colon 
cancer 
Recommendation 1 .3.13 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
The committ ee made t he recommendation t o consider chemot herap y preoperativ ely for 
people wit h cT4 colonic cancer based on e vidence t hat it impr oved sur vival and rat es of 
clear r esection mar gins in t hese patient s. The committ ee was only able t o recommend 
preoperativ e chemot herap y as an option t o consider because t he evidence was of lo w 
quality , despit e the lar ge sample siz e. Ther e was no e vidence on t he eff ectiv eness of 
preoperativ e chemot herap y for people wit h colonic cancers at ot her stages. 
The committ ee also consider ed non-peer -review ed result s from FOx TROT: a lar ge 
international trial comparing pr eoperativ e plus post operativ e chemot herap y (wit h or 
without panitumumab ) to standar d post operativ e chemot herap y in people wit h cT3 or Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 33 of
48
cT4a resectable tumours. The r esult s sho wed that complet e clinical r esponse and tumour 
downstaging ar e mor e likely in t hose who r eceiv e preoperativ e chemot herap y, however at 
the time of publication of t his guideline t here was insufficient duration of f ollow-up t o 
assess long-t erm out comes. 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
The curr ent standar d of car e is sur gical r esection wit h post operativ e chemot herap y, 
dependent on t he or gans or structur es in volved and t he degr ee of in volvement. The 
committ ee was awar e that some centr es alr eady giv e preoperativ e chemot herap y, but 
noted that t his recommendation will aff ect practice and ha ve a resour ce impact in 
hospitals wher e this is not standar d practice. 
Return t o recommendation 
Duration o f adjuvant chemother apy for pe ople wi th 
colorectal c ancer 
Recommendation 1 .3.14 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
The benefit s and risks of adjuv ant chemot herap y can depend on se veral f actors, including 
the stage and charact eristics of t he cancer , and t he person's per formance status, 
comorbidities and age. 
Peripheral neur opat hy is r ecognised as a major long-t erm side eff ect of o xaliplatin 
chemot herap y, and t he risk of de veloping persist ent neur opat hy incr eases b y cumulativ e 
dose of tr eatment. The standar d duration of chemot herap y has been 6  mont hs, but a 
shor ter 3-mont h course has been in vestigat ed. 
Ther e was good e vidence t hat sho wed 3  mont hs of CAPO X chemot herap y was at least as 
beneficial f or people wit h colon cancer as a 6-mont h course but caused considerably less 
severe neur opat hy and was cost sa ving. Ho wever, with FOLFO X chemot herap y, disease-
free sur vival was w orse aft er a 3-mont h course compar ed wit h the standar d 6-mont h 
course, alt hough t he rat e of se vere neur opat hy was again considerably lo wer in t he 
3-mont h group. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 34 of
48
A high-quality healt h economic study f ound a 3-mont h course of FOLFO X to be cost 
effectiv e compar ed to a 6-mont h course, despit e lower disease-fr ee sur vival, as a r esult of 
a decr ease in cost s. Alt hough t his economic e vidence was dir ectly applicable t o the 
clinical question, and t he study was included in t he consideration of t he clinical e vidence, 
the committ ee was concerned t hat basing r ecommendations solely in line wit h the 
economic e valuation (t hat is, CAPO X for 3 mont hs or FOLFO X for 3 mont hs) might lead t o 
people who w ould ot herwise ha ve receiv ed 6-mont h FOLFO X to opt f or 3-mont h CAPO X 
instead. 
In the SCO T trial CAPO X was associat ed wit h a higher rat e of se vere diarrhoea t han 
FOLFO X. This was not look ed at b y the economic e valuation and t he 'swit ching' gr oup 
would lik ely to be at higher risk of t oxicity-r elated complications wit h worse out comes, 
increased tr eatment -related mor tality and incr eased cost s from t he tr eatment of se vere 
adverse e vents than t he trial population f or 3-mont h CAPO X. This w ould decr ease t he 
certainty of t he conclusions of t he economic e valuation. 
Based on t he balance of benefit s and lo wer risk of long-t erm adv erse eff ects, the 
committ ee agr eed CAPO X for 3 mont hs should be t he first choice of adjuv ant tr eatment. If 
CAPO X is not suitable, f or example because of t he person's higher risk of and lo wer 
tolerance f or se vere diarrhoea, FOLFO X should be off ered. Ha ving consider ed the 
economic e valuation giv en the clinical concerns, it was decided t hat t here should be an 
individualised consideration of t he duration of FOLFO X for people if 3-mont h CAPO X 
chemot herap y is not suitable f or them, taking int o account t he benefit s and shor t- and 
long-t erm harms of bot h options, t he person's comorbidities, per formance status and 
preference. 
Single-agent capecitabine chemot herap y is also an eff ectiv e adjuv ant tr eatment and can 
be mor e suitable f or people who ar e older (f or example o ver 70) or less fit, as it is 
associat ed wit h fewer side eff ects than chemot herap y treatment s that contain o xaliplatin. 
The a vailable e vidence is mainly f or people wit h colon cancer . However, people wit h rectal 
cancer who had r eceiv ed eit her shor t-course pr eoperativ e radiot herap y or no pr eoperativ e 
therap y were also included in a lar ge randomised trial and t heir out comes w ere similar t o 
people wit h colon cancer , and t herefore the committ ee agr eed t he recommendation could 
also apply t o this population. 
No recommendations w ere made f or people wit h rectal cancer who ha ve been tr eated wit h 
long-course chemot herap y or chemoradiot herap y because no e vidence was identified in Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 35 of
48
the available trials. 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
Halving t he standar d car e from 6  mont hs to 3 mont hs (for people who can ha ve CAPO X) 
will r educe tr eatment time and cost s, meaning people ha ve chemot herap y side eff ects for 
a shor ter time, and will lo wer the incidence of long-t erm t oxicity (neur opat hy) and it s 
consequences. 
Return t o recommendation 
Colonic sten ts in acu te lar ge bowel obstruc tion 
Recommendations 1 .3.15 and 1 .3.16 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
In patient s presenting wit h acut e left -sided lar ge bo wel obstruction, e vidence sho wed that 
stoma rat es w ere reduced in t he st enting gr oup compar ed to the emer gency sur gery 
group. Ther e was no e vidence of a diff erence in o verall or disease-fr ee sur vival. St enting 
also allo ws time t o fully assess t he patient and stabilise an y comorbidities bef ore 
proceeding wit h pot entially curativ e sur gery. The committ ee consider ed the yet to be 
published r esult s of t he CREST trial shar ed wit h the committ ee in confidence which w ere 
consist ent wit h the published e vidence. 
The committ ee not ed the evidence t hat st enting sometimes causes per foration and is not 
alwa ys technically successful and so ma y not be appr opriat e in all cases f or the curativ e 
intent tr eatment gr oup. F or this reason t hey also r ecommended emer gency sur gery as an 
option. 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
Stenting is established practice f or patient s presenting wit h acut e left -sided lar ge bo wel 
obstruction who ar e to be tr eated wit h palliativ e intent. St enting is not established practice 
in those t o be tr eated wit h curativ e intent. Ther efore, the recommendation could lead t o an 
increase in t he pr ovision of st enting and associat ed cost s. Ho wever, stenting allo ws 
patient s to be assessed and become stable bef ore sur gery, in turn r educing operativ e Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 36 of
48
morbidity , the need f or st oma and pr eventing e xpensiv e sur gery in t hose people when it 
would not be appr opriat e, thus r educing do wnstr eam cost s. Some patient s might need t o 
be transf erred to anot her unit in or der t o receiv e a st ent. 
Return t o recommendations 
Molecular biomar kers to guide systemic an ti-
cancer ther apy 
Recommendation 1 .4.1 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
The e vidence sho wed that RAS and BRAF  V600E mutations w ere predictiv e of r esponse t o 
anti-epidermal gr owth factor recept or (EGFR) tar geted therap y in people wit h metastatic 
color ectal cancer . People wit h RAS or BRAF  V600E mutant metastatic color ectal cancer 
also had poor er pr ogression-fr ee and o verall sur vival than t hose wit hout such mutations. 
While RAS t esting is alr eady used t o select t hose people wit h metastatic color ectal cancer 
most lik ely to benefit fr om anti-EGFR tar geted therap y, BRAF  V600E t esting has t he 
potential t o fur ther r efine t his gr oup. 
The committ ee not ed evidence t hat t esting f or deficient DNA mismat ch repair ma y inform 
systemic t herap y choices f or those wit h non-metastatic color ectal cancer , but t he NICE 
diagnostics guidance on molecular t esting strat egies f or Lynch syndr ome in people wit h 
color ectal cancer  already r ecommends such t esting f or all people wit h color ectal cancer 
when first diagnosed. F or this reason no fur ther r ecommendations w ere made about 
testing f or deficient DNA mismat ch repair . 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
RAS t esting (KRAS and NRAS) is curr ent practice. BRAF  V600E t esting is not done 
routinely in curr ent practice. BRAF  V600E t est can be done fr om t he extended color ectal 
cancer molecular t est panel which is par t of t he recommendations in t he NICE diagnostics 
guidance on molecular t esting strat egies f or Lynch syndr ome in people wit h color ectal 
cancer , so t he recommendation should not ha ve a lar ge impact on practice or cost s. 
Return t o recommendation Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 37 of
48
People wi th asym ptoma tic primar y tumour 
Recommendation 1 .5.1 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
For people wit h incurable metastatic color ectal cancer whose primar y tumour is 
asympt omatic, t here was some lo w-quality e vidence of bett er overall sur vival in t hose who 
had r esection of t heir primar y tumour and chemot herap y compar ed wit h chemot herap y 
alone. 
Around a quar ter of t his gr oup had post operativ e complications and a small pr opor tion 
(around 5%) had se vere post operativ e complications which needed int ervention or w ere 
life-threatening. Ho wever, resecting t he tumour at t his stage can pr event sympt oms fr om 
developing lat er: almost a fift h of people who did not ha ve the asympt omatic primar y 
tumour r esect ed w ent on t o develop primar y tumour -related sympt oms t hat needed 
surgical tr eatment which could oft en mean an emer gency operation t hat can ha ve higher 
risks of complications and st oma. Because of t his, t he committ ee agr eed t he implications 
should be discussed wit h the person so t hey can mak e an inf ormed decision. 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
Ther e could be an incr ease in r esections of asympt omatic primar y tumours, ho wever, the 
population wit h metastatic color ectal cancer and asympt omatic primar y tumour is small so 
no major cost impact is e xpect ed. 
Return t o recommendation 
Systemic an ti-cancer ther apy for pe ople wi th 
metasta tic c olorectal c ancer 
Recommendation 1 .5.2 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
Guidance on syst emic anti-cancer t herap y for people wit h metastatic color ectal cancer is 
covered by NICE t echnology appraisals, which w ere not updat ed by this guideline. The Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 38 of
48
committ ee did not r eview t he technology appraisals. The t echnology appraisals should be 
used when appr opriat e to guide t he choice of syst emic anti-cancer t herap y. 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
The r ecommendation r eflect s curr ent practice and no change in practice is e xpect ed. 
Return t o recommendation 
People wi th me tasta tic c olorectal c ancer in the 
liver 
Recommendations 1 .5.3 to 1.5.6 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Ther e was not enough e vidence t o sho w if simultaneous or sequential r esection is bett er. 
Ther e was some poor -quality e vidence fr om retrospectiv e cohor t studies sho wing t hat 
people who under went sequential r esection had bett er liv er pr ogression-fr ee sur vival. 
However, these r esult s might be influenced b y baseline diff erences betw een t he gr oups, 
and t here was no diff erence in r ecurr ence in ot her par ts of t he body or in o verall sur vival in 
several studies. Ther e was no diff erence in shor t-term adv erse e vents and no e vidence on 
quality of lif e was a vailable. Based on t hese findings and t heir e xperience, t he committ ee 
agreed t hat a multidisciplinar y team wit h exper tise in bot h color ectal and liv er disease 
should consider if a simultaneous or a sequential r esection is appr opriat e, taking int o 
account t he person's pr eference. 
Evidence fr om randomised trials suggest ed that chemot herap y in addition t o liver 
resection impr oves disease-fr ee sur vival and ma y impr ove overall sur vival. The pot ential 
benefit on sur vival should be balanced wit h a higher rat e of tr eatment -related adv erse 
events because of added chemot herap y. No quality of lif e evidence was a vailable. 
The e vidence on chemot herap y combined wit h radiofr equency ablation sho wed bett er 
overall sur vival and pr ogression-fr ee sur vival compar ed to chemot herap y alone. No 
difference was obser ved in tr eatment -related mor tality and morbidity . The e vidence on 
quality of lif e was t oo limit ed for the committ ee to draw an y conclusions. The e vidence on 
survival came fr om a single small study and t he committ ee had doubt s about it s relevance Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 39 of
48
to curr ent practice. Because of t he uncer tainties in t he evidence, t he committ ee 
recommended considering chemot herap y wit h local ablativ e techniques as an option f or 
people whose liv er metastases ar e det ermined b y the multidisciplinar y team t o be 
unresectable but pot entially curable. The e vidence was on radiofr equency ablation, which 
is still used but in man y centr es has been lar gely r eplaced b y new er local ablativ e 
techniques such as micr owave ablation (see t he NICE int erventional pr ocedur es guidance 
on micr owave ablation f or treating liv er metastases ). Ther efore, the committ ee agr eed t hat 
it is mor e appr opriat e that local ablativ e techniques, not only radiofr equency ablation, ar e 
consider ed. 
Evidence fr om se veral RCT s did not sho w an y benefit on o verall sur vival from selectiv e 
internal radiation t herap y (SIRT) as a first -line tr eatment f or people wit h color ectal liv er 
metastases. NICE int erventional pr ocedur es guidance on selectiv e internal radiation 
therap y for non-r esectable color ectal metastases in t he liv er giv es fur ther guidance in 
which cir cumstances SIRT could be used. Only limit ed evidence fr om one small RCT was 
available on t he eff ectiv eness of SIRT f or people r efract ory or int olerant t o standar d 
chemot herap y. The committ ee w ere awar e of an NHS England commissioning policy on 
SIRT as t hird-line tr eatment, which used obser vational data in addition t o the small RCT as 
their e vidence base. Ho wever, because of limit ed RCT e vidence t he committ ee was not 
able t o mak e a recommendation. 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
The r ecommendations lar gely r eflect curr ent practice and no substantial change in 
practice is e xpect ed. 
Return t o recommendations 
People wi th me tasta tic c olorectal c ancer in the 
lung 
Recommendations 1 .5.7 and 1 .5.8 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
As there was limit ed evidence, t he committ ee made r ecommendations based on t heir 
clinical kno wledge. Ther e was not enough e vidence t o recommend one tr eatment o ver Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 40 of
48
anot her e ven though t he curr ent first choice is t o per form sur gery over st ereotactic body 
radiation t herap y or ablation. R eferring people t o multidisciplinar y teams t hat specialise in 
primar y lung disease ma y not be appr opriat e as t hey do not specialise in t he management 
of lung metastases fr om color ectal cancer . Ther efore, the committ ee agr eed t hat t he 
multidisciplinar y team should include a t horacic sur geon and a specialist in non-sur gical 
ablation t o ensur e that t he appr opriat e specialist kno wledge is a vailable. 
Based on t heir clinical kno wledge, t he committ ee recommended t hat biopsies should be 
consider ed for patient s wit h a single lung lesion t o rule out primar y lung cancer and guide 
treatment options e ven if sur gical e xcision is not planned. 
Because of t he lack of clinical e vidence, a randomised trial comparing sur gical t o non-
surgical tr eatment is needed t o provide mor e high quality , comparativ e data, so t he 
committ ee made a recommendation f or resear ch on tr eatment f or metastatic color ectal 
cancer in t he lung . 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
The r ecommendations ar e expect ed to incr ease t he in volvement of t horacic sur geons in 
the management of metastatic color ectal cancer , however this additional e xper tise w ould 
result in e xpensiv e treatment s being mor e appr opriat ely tar geted. While assessing fitness 
for sur gery is common practice, t he advice t o also discuss f actors including disease-fr ee 
interval, car cinoembr yonic antigen (CEA) le vel, number , size and sit e of metastases and 
other sit es of disease should impr ove best practice acr oss t he NHS. 
Return t o recommendations 
People wi th me tasta tic c olorectal c ancer in the 
peritoneum 
Recommendation 1 .5.9 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
The committ ee made t he recommendation based on bot h the evidence and t heir clinical 
knowledge. The advice t o off er syst emic anti-cancer t herap y and t o discuss r eferral t o a 
specialist cyt oreductiv e sur gery centr e is in t he same r ecommendation because t hese Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 4 1 of
48
interventions should happen at t he same time. That is, making a r eferral should not wait 
until chemot herap y has been giv en, and chemot herap y could be star ted bef ore the person 
is review ed in t he specialist centr e. 
It is standar d practice t o star t all patient s on a course of syst emic anti-cancer t herap y and 
the evidence suppor ted this, sho wing gr eater overall sur vival compar ed to suppor tive 
care. The e vidence on t he eff ectiv eness of cyt oreductiv e sur gery and h yper thermic 
intraperit oneal chemot herap y (HIPEC) was mix ed but, based on t heir clinical kno wledge, 
the committ ee decided t hey should be consider ed. 
The committ ee agr eed it was impor tant t o recommend r eferral t o a nationally 
commissioned specialist centr e aft er discussion wit hin a multidisciplinar y team f or 
consideration of cyt oreductiv e sur gery and HIPEC so t hat mor e patient s can ha ve 
potentially curativ e treatment and t o avoid centr es off ering t he tr eatment wit hout ha ving 
the necessar y training and r esour ces. This advice is in line wit h the NICE int erventional 
procedur es guidance on cyt oreductiv e sur gery wit h hyper thermic intraoperativ e perit oneal 
chemot herap y for perit oneal car cinomat osis. 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
Stenting is not established practice in t hose t o be tr eated wit h curativ e intent. Ther efore, 
the recommendation could lead t o an incr ease in t he pr ovision of st enting and associat ed 
costs. Ho wever, stenting allo ws patient s to be assessed and become stable bef ore 
surgery, in turn r educing operativ e morbidity , the need f or st oma and pr eventing e xpensiv e 
surgery in t hose people when it w ould not be appr opriat e, thus r educing do wnstr eam 
costs. Some patient s might need t o be transf erred to anot her unit in or der t o receiv e a 
stent. 
Return t o recommendation 
Follow-up f or de tection o f loc al recurr ence and 
distan t me tastases 
Recommendation 1 .6.1 Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 42 of
48
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tion 
Evidence sho wed that r ecurr ent disease was mor e likely to be r esectable when patient s 
receiv ed regular f ollow-up t ests than wit h minimal or no f ollow-up. Evidence also sho wed 
recurr ent disease was mor e likely to be r esectable when f ollow-up t ests included CEA and 
liver imaging. The 2011 NICE guideline on color ectal cancer (updat ed and r eplaced b y this 
guideline) r ecommended CEA and CT t esting in t he first 3  years aft er treatment wit h 
curativ e intent, and t he committ ee did not find e vidence t o change t his. Colonoscopic 
surveillance t o det ect metachr onous color ectal neoplasia was out side t he scope of t his 
guideline (t he British Society of Gastr oent erology and t he Association of Colopr octology 
for Gr eat Britain and Ir eland ha ve guidance on t his topic). 
How the r ecommenda tion mig ht affect practice 
The r ecommendation r eflect s curr ent practice so t he committ ee agr eed t here should be 
no change in practice. 
Return t o recommendation 
Manag emen t of low an terior r esection syndr ome 
Recommendations 1 .6.2 to 1.6.4 
Why the c ommi ttee made the r ecommenda tions 
Based on t heir e xperience, t he committ ee agr eed lo w ant erior r esection syndr ome (L ARS) 
can ha ve a significant impact on a person's quality of lif e and daily functioning, so it is 
impor tant t o identify and tr eat it quickly . It is impor tant t hat people who ha ve had 
sphinct er-preserving sur gery are awar e of it s sympt oms so t hey can seek help. Because 
LARS ma y only become appar ent aft er dischar ge fr om hospital, it is impor tant t hat it can 
be identified in primar y car e. LARS should be assessed using a v alidat ed tool, f or example 
the European Society of Colopr octology's L ARS scor e, which is a v alidat ed patient -
administ ered questionnair e. 
No comparativ e evidence on diff erent tr eatment s for LARS was a vailable, so t he 
committ ee agr eed based on t heir e xperience t hat people wit h LARS should be off ered 
sympt omatic tr eatment in primar y car e. The committ ee also agr eed t hat if tr eatment s 
offered in primar y car e have not helped, advice should be sought fr om secondar y car e to Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 43 of
48
discuss fur ther options and consider specialist input. Timing of t his should be based on 
clinical judgement taking int o consideration, f or example, se verity of sympt oms and impact 
on quality of lif e. 
Because of t he lack of e vidence on t he eff ectiv eness of tr eatment s for LARS, a 
recommendation f or resear ch was made t o compar e sacral ner ve stimulation and transanal 
irrigation in people wit h LARS f or whom conser vative treatment s have not w orked. 
How the r ecommenda tions mig ht affect practice 
Primar y car e clinicians ar e not necessarily awar e of L ARS or ho w to assess it, and 
administ ering t he questionnair e might need e xtra w ork and time. Ho wever, it is patient -
administ ered and easy t o scor e and no training should be needed. Bo wel dysfunction 
treatment f or associat ed sympt oms ar e commonly deliv ered in primar y car e, therefore, the 
recommendation is not e xpect ed to have a lar ge impact on curr ent practice in t erms of 
number of patient s and int erventions, ho wever, raising awar eness of L ARS will be needed 
among primar y car e professionals. 
Return t o recommendations Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 44 of
48
Context 
Color ectal cancer ( cancer of t he colon or r ectum, or bo wel cancer) is t he fourth most 
common cancer in t he UK, wit h over 41,000 new cases diagnosed each y ear accor ding t o 
Cancer R esear ch UK's bo wel cancer statistics . Risk f actors include incr easing age, 
genetics and f amily hist ory (par ticularly syndr omes such as f amilial adenomat ous 
polyposis and L ynch syndr ome), inflammat ory bowel disease and ot her dietar y and 
lifestyle f actors. Sur vival rat es ha ve impr oved over time, wit h almost 60% of people 
diagnosed wit h color ectal cancer sur viving f or at least 5  years. Sur vival is link ed to disease 
stage at pr esentation, wit h bett er sur vival the earlier t he disease is det ected and tr eated. 
People wit h Lynch syndr ome ha ve an incr eased risk of color ectal cancer , with lifetime risk 
estimat ed to be betw een ar ound 50% t o 80% (see Lynch Syndr ome in Gene R eviews ). The 
main strat egy t o prevent color ectal cancer in people wit h Lynch syndr ome has been 
regular scr eening wit h colonoscop y and polypect omy. Aspirin has been suggest ed as 
anot her pot ential pr evention strat egy f or color ectal cancer . 
Diagnosis and staging of color ectal cancer ar e well established wit h hist ology and 
appr opriat e imaging, and ar e not co vered by this guideline. 
Management of color ectal cancer has adv anced o ver time wit h new tr eatment met hods 
and strat egies being trialled and used. Management of local disease diff ers depending on 
the sit e of t he cancer . The standar d practice f or colon cancer is t o off er sur gery for those 
who ar e fit f or it. R ecent trials ha ve studied t he eff ectiv eness of pr eoperativ e syst emic 
anti-cancer t herap y for colon cancer t o impr ove sur vival. Treatment f or rectal cancer is 
more comple x. Ther e is v ariation in curr ent practice in t he tr eatment f or early r ectal 
cancer , use of pr eoperativ e (chemo )radiot herap y, surgical t echnique f or rectal cancer 
surgery, and tr eatment f or locally adv anced or r ecurr ent r ectal cancer . This guideline 
addr esses all t hese issues. Until no w, the standar d duration of adjuv ant syst emic t herap y 
for color ectal cancer has been 6  mont hs, which has been r ecent ly challenged b y 
suggestion of a shor ter duration in or der t o lower toxicity caused b y the tr eatment. 
Metastatic color ectal cancer commonly aff ects the liv er, lungs or perit oneum. T reatment 
for metastatic color ectal cancer depends on, f or example, t he sit e and number of t he 
metastases and if t he metastases ar e amenable t o local tr eatment. In addition, t he role of 
molecular biomark ers in pr edicting eff ectiv eness of syst emic anti-cancer t herap y has been 
discussed incr easingly in r ecent y ears. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 45 of
48
People who ha ve been tr eated for color ectal cancer ma y have long-t erm side eff ects of 
their tr eatment s. For example, lo w ant erior r esection syndr ome can ha ve major impact on 
quality of lif e and daily living, and it aff ects around 40% of t hose who ha ve under gone 
sphinct er-preserving sur gery for rectal cancer . It is impor tant t hat t he tr eatment options, 
their implications and pot ential consequences ar e discussed t oget her wit h the person wit h 
color ectal cancer in or der t o enable shar ed decision making. Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 46 of
48
Finding mor e inf orma tion and c ommi ttee 
details 
To find NICE guidance on r elated topics, including guidance in de velopment, see t he NICE 
topic page on color ectal cancer . 
For full details of t he evidence and t he guideline committ ee's discussions, see t he 
evidence r eviews . You can also find inf ormation about how the guideline was de veloped , 
including details of t he committ ee. 
NICE has pr oduced tools and r esour ces t o help y ou put t his guideline int o practice . For 
general help and advice on putting NICE guidelines int o practice, see resour ces t o help 
you put guidance int o practice . Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 47 of
48
Update inf orma tion 
December 2021:  We updat ed recommendation 1 .3.9 to say that transanal t otal mesor ectal 
excision should be used only in r esear ch, in line wit h NICE's int erventional pr ocedur es 
guidance on transanal t otal mesor ectal e xcision f or rectal cancer . 
Januar y 2020:  This guideline is an updat e of NICE guideline CG131 (published No vember 
2011) and NICE guideline CSG5 (published June 2004) and has r eplaced t hem. 
Minor changes since publication 
Januar y 2025:  We added a link t o NICE's int erventional pr ocedur es guidance on 
cytoreduction sur gery wit h hyper thermic intraoperativ e perit oneal chemot herap y for 
perit oneal car cinomat osis (IPG688) t o the section on metastatic color ectal cancer in t he 
perit oneum. 
July 2021: We clarified r ecommendation 1 .1.1 to consider daily aspirin t o reduce t he risk of 
color ectal cancer in people wit h Lynch syndr ome. W e also r emoved the aspirin doses t o 
clarify t hat w e are not r ecommending a par ticular dose. 
August 2020:  A link t o the NICE sur veillance r eview of a f ollow-up study t o the 
randomised contr olled trial  which r ecommendation 1 .1.1 was based on was added t o the 
rationale and impact section. 
ISBN: 9 78-1-47 31-3657-1 Color ectal cancer (NG151)
© NICE 2025 . All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 48 of
48
