Bladder c ancer: diagnosis 
and manag emen t 
NICE guideline 
Published: 25 F ebruar y 2015 
www .nice.or g.uk/guidance/ng2 
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).
Your r esponsi bility 
The r ecommendations in t his guideline r epresent t he view of NICE, arriv ed at aft er car eful 
consideration of t he evidence a vailable. When e xercising t heir judgement, pr ofessionals 
and practitioners ar e expect ed to tak e this guideline fully int o account, alongside t he 
individual needs, pr eferences and v alues of t heir patient s or t he people using t heir ser vice. 
It is not mandat ory to apply t he recommendations, and t he guideline does not o verride t he 
responsibility t o mak e decisions appr opriat e to the cir cumstances of t he individual, in 
consultation wit h them and t heir f amilies and car ers or guar dian. 
All pr oblems (adv erse e vents) related to a medicine or medical de vice used f or treatment 
or in a pr ocedur e should be r epor ted to the Medicines and Healt hcare product s Regulat ory 
Agency using t he Yellow Car d Scheme . 
Local commissioners and pr oviders of healt hcare have a responsibility t o enable t he 
guideline t o be applied when individual pr ofessionals and people using ser vices wish t o 
use it. The y should do so in t he cont ext of local and national priorities f or funding and 
developing ser vices, and in light of t heir duties t o have due r egar d to the need t o eliminat e 
unlawful discrimination, t o adv ance equality of oppor tunity and t o reduce healt h 
inequalities. Not hing in t his guideline should be int erpreted in a wa y that w ould be 
inconsist ent wit h complying wit h those duties. 
Commissioners and pr oviders ha ve a responsibility t o promot e an en vironmentally 
sustainable healt h and car e syst em and should assess and r educe t he en vironmental 
impact of implementing NICE r ecommendations  wher ever possible. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 of
34
Contents 
Overview ..................................................................................................................................... 4 
Who is it f or? .......................................................................................................................................... 4 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 5 
Key priorities f or implementation .............................................................................................. 7 
Information and suppor t for people wit h bladder cancer ................................................................. 7 
Diagnosing and staging bladder cancer ............................................................................................. 7 
Treating non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ................................................................................... 8 
Follow-up aft er treatment f or non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ............................................... 9 
Treating muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ........................................................................................... 9 
Recommendations ...................................................................................................................... 11 
1.1 Information and suppor t for people wit h bladder cancer ............................................................ 11 
1.2 Diagnosing and staging bladder cancer ....................................................................................... 13 
1.3 Treating non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ............................................................................. 15 
1.4 Follow-up aft er treatment f or non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ......................................... 19 
1.5 Treating muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ..................................................................................... 20 
1.6 Follow-up aft er treatment f or muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ................................................. 23 
1.7 Managing locally adv anced or metastatic muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ............................. 24 
1.8 Specialist palliativ e car e for people wit h incurable bladder cancer ........................................... 28 
Recommendations f or resear ch ................................................................................................ 29 
1 Patient satisf action ............................................................................................................................. 29 
2 BCG or primar y cyst ectomy in high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer .......................... 30 
3 Follow-up of high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ........................................................ 30 
4 Biomark ers for treatment selection .................................................................................................. 31 
5 Follow-up aft er radical tr eatment f or or gan-confined muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ............ 31 
Finding mor e information and committ ee details .................................................................... 33 
Updat e information .................................................................................................................... 34 Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 3 of
34
This guideline is t he basis of QS106 . 
Overview 
This guideline co vers diagnosing and managing bladder cancer in people 18  and abo ve 
referred fr om primar y car e wit h suspect ed bladder cancer , and t hose wit h newly 
diagnosed or r ecurr ent bladder (ur othelial car cinoma, adenocar cinoma, squamous-cell 
carcinoma or small-cell car cinoma) or ur ethral cancer . 
Who is i t for? 
• Healt hcare professionals 
• Commissioners and pr oviders 
• Adult s wit h bladder cancer and t heir f amilies and car ers Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 4 of
34
Introduc tion 
Bladder cancer is t he se venth most common cancer in t he UK. It is 3  to 4 times mor e 
common in men t han in w omen. In t he UK in 2011 , it was t he fourth most common cancer 
in men and t he thirteent h most common in w omen. Ther e were 10,399 people diagnosed 
with bladder cancer and 5081  deat hs fr om bladder cancer in 2011 . The majority of cases 
occur in people aged o ver 60. The main risk f actor for bladder cancer is incr easing age, 
but smoking and e xposur e to some industrial chemicals also incr ease risk. 
Bladder cancer is usually identified on t he basis of visible blood in t he urine or blood f ound 
on urine t esting, but emer gency admission is a common wa y for bladder cancer t o present, 
and is oft en associat ed wit h a poor pr ognosis. 
Most bladder cancers (7 5 to 80%) do not in volve the muscle wall of t he bladder and ar e 
usually tr eated by telescopic r emoval of t he cancer (transur ethral r esection of bladder 
tumour [TURBT]). This is oft en followed by instillation of chemot herap y or v accine-based 
therap y into the bladder , with prolonged t elescopic checking of t he bladder ( cystoscop y) 
as follow-up. Some people in t his gr oup who ar e at higher risk ar e treated wit h major 
surgery to remove the bladder ( cystectomy). People wit h cancer in or t hrough t he bladder 
muscle wall ma y be tr eated wit h intent t o cur e using chemot herap y, cyst ectomy or 
radiot herap y, and t hose who ha ve cancer t oo adv anced t o cur e ma y have radiot herap y 
and chemot herap y. 
The in volvement of t he ur ogenital tract and t he natur e of t he tr eatment s giv e this cancer a 
strong psy chological impact, in addition t o the ph ysical impact of t he disease and it s 
treatment s, which is oft en pr ofound. The pr evalence of t he condition and t he natur e of it s 
management mak e bladder cancer one of t he most e xpensiv e cancers f or the NHS. 
Ther e is t hought t o be considerable v ariation acr oss t he NHS in t he diagnosis and 
management of bladder cancer and t he pr ovision of car e to people who ha ve it. Ther e is 
evidence t hat t he patient e xperience f or people wit h bladder cancer is w orse t han t hat f or 
people wit h other cancers. 
This guideline co vers adult s (18  years and older) r eferred fr om primar y car e wit h 
suspect ed bladder cancer and t hose wit h newly diagnosed or r ecurr ent bladder (ur othelial 
carcinoma, adenocar cinoma, squamous-cell car cinoma or small-cell car cinoma) or ur ethral 
cancer . Ther e was insufficient high-quality e vidence on which t o mak e specific Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 5 of
34
recommendations f or non-ur othelial bladder cancer (adenocar cinoma, squamous-cell 
carcinoma or small-cell car cinoma). 
It does not co ver people aged under  18 or adult s wit h bladder sar coma, ur othelial cancer 
of the upper urinar y tract, or secondar y bladder or ur ethral cancer (f or example, bo wel or 
cervix cancer spr eading int o the bladder). Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 6 of
34
Key priori ties f or im plemen tation 
The f ollowing r ecommendations ha ve been identified as priorities f or implementation. The 
full list of r ecommendations is in section 1 . 
Informa tion and suppor t for pe ople wi th bladder 
cancer 
• Use a holistic needs assessment t o identify an individualised package of inf ormation 
and suppor t for people wit h bladder cancer and, if t hey wish, t heir par tners, f amilies or 
carers, at k ey point s in t heir car e such as: 
－ when t hey are first diagnosed 
－ after they have had t heir first tr eatment 
－ if their bladder cancer r ecurs or pr ogresses 
－ if their tr eatment is changed 
－ if palliativ e or end of lif e car e is being discussed. 
Diagnosing and stag ing b ladder c ancer 
Diagnosis 
• Consider CT or MRI staging bef ore transur ethral r esection of bladder tumour (TURBT) 
if muscle-in vasive bladder cancer is suspect ed at cyst oscop y. 
• Offer whit e-light -guided TURBT wit h one of phot odynamic diagnosis, narr ow-band 
imaging, cyt ology or a urinar y biomark er test (such as Ur oVysion using fluor escence 
in-situ h ybridization [FISH], ImmunoCyt or a nuclear matrix pr otein 22 [NMP22] t est) t o 
people wit h suspect ed bladder cancer . This should be carried out or super vised b y a 
urologist e xperienced in TURBT . 
• Offer people wit h suspect ed bladder cancer a single dose of intra vesical mit omycin C 
given at t he same time as t he first TURBT . Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 7 of
34
Treating non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
Prognostic mar kers and risk classific ation 
• Ensur e that f or people wit h non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer all of t he following ar e 
recorded and used t o guide discussions, bot h wit hin multidisciplinar y team meetings 
and wit h the person, about pr ognosis and tr eatment options: 
－ recurr ence hist ory 
－ size and number of cancers 
－ histological type, grade, stage and pr esence ( or absence) of flat ur othelium, 
detrusor muscle (muscularis pr opria), and car cinoma in situ 
－ the risk cat egor y of t he person's cancer (see t he section on risk classification in 
non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ) 
－ predict ed risk of r ecurr ence and pr ogression, estimat ed using a risk pr ediction 
tool. 
High-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
• Offer the choice of intra vesical BCG (Bacille Calmett e-Guérin) or radical cyst ectomy to 
people wit h high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer  (see t he section on risk 
classification in non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ), and base t he choice on a full 
discussion wit h the person, t he clinical nurse specialist and a ur ologist who per forms 
both intra vesical BCG and radical cyst ectomy. Include in y our discussion: 
－ the type, stage and grade of t he cancer , the pr esence of car cinoma in situ, t he 
presence of v ariant pat hology , prostatic ur ethral or bladder neck status and t he 
number of tumours 
－ risk of pr ogression t o muscle in vasion, metastases and deat h 
－ risk of understaging 
－ benefit s of bot h treatment s, including sur vival rat es and t he lik elihood of fur ther 
treatment 
－ risks of bot h treatment s Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 8 of
34
－ factors t hat aff ect out comes (f or example, comorbidities and lif e expectancy) 
－ impact on quality of lif e, body image, and se xual and urinar y function. 
Follow-up af ter tr eatmen t for non -muscle-in vasive 
bladder c ancer 
Low-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
• Dischar ge to primar y car e people who ha ve had lo w-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder 
cancer (see t he section on risk classification in non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ) 
and who ha ve no r ecurr ence of t he bladder cancer wit hin 12  mont hs. 
Interme diate-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
• Offer people wit h intermediat e-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer (see t he 
section on risk classification in non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ) 
non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer cyst oscopic f ollow-up at 3 , 9 and 18  mont hs, and 
once a y ear t hereafter. 
Treating m uscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
Neoadjuvant chemother apy for ne wly diagnose d muscle-in vasive 
urothelial b ladder c ancer 
• Offer neoadjuv ant chemot herap y using a cisplatin combination r egimen bef ore radical 
cystectomy or radical radiot herap y to people wit h newly diagnosed muscle-in vasive 
urothelial bladder cancer f or whom cisplatin-based chemot herap y is suitable. Ensur e 
that t hey have an oppor tunity t o discuss t he risks and benefit s wit h an oncologist who 
treats bladder cancer . 
Radic al ther apy for m uscle-in vasive urothelial b ladder c ancer 
• Offer a choice of radical cyst ectomy or radiot herap y wit h a radiosensitiser t o people 
with muscle-in vasive urothelial bladder cancer f or whom radical t herap y is suitable. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 9 of
34
Ensur e that t he choice is based on a full discussion betw een t he person and a 
urologist who per forms radical cyst ectomy, a clinical oncologist and a clinical nurse 
specialist. Include in t he discussion: 
－ the pr ognosis wit h or wit hout tr eatment 
－ the limit ed evidence about whet her sur gery or radiot herap y wit h a radiosensitiser 
is the most eff ectiv e cancer tr eatment 
－ the benefit s and risks of sur gery and radiot herap y wit h a radiosensitiser , including 
the impact on se xual and bo wel function and t he risk of deat h as a r esult of t he 
treatment. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 10 of
34
Recommenda tions 
The f ollowing guidance is based on t he best a vailable e vidence. The full guideline  gives 
details of t he met hods and t he evidence used t o develop t he guidance. 
People ha ve the right t o be in volved in discussions and mak e informed decisions 
about t heir car e, as described in NICE's inf ormation on making decisions about y our 
care. 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines  explains ho w we use w ords to sho w the 
strengt h (or cer tainty) of our r ecommendations, and has inf ormation about 
prescribing medicines (including off -label use), pr ofessional guidelines, standar ds 
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and saf eguar ding. 
1.1 Informa tion and suppor t for pe ople wi th bladder 
cancer 
1.1.1 Follow the recommendations on communication and patient -centr ed car e in 
NICE's guideline on patient e xperience in adult NHS ser vices  and t he advice in 
NICE's guidelines on impr oving out comes in ur ological cancers  and improving 
suppor tive and palliativ e car e for adult s wit h cancer  throughout t he person's 
care. 
1.1.2 Offer clinical nurse specialist suppor t to people wit h bladder cancer and giv e 
them t he clinical nurse specialist's contact details. 
1.1.3 Ensur e that t he clinical nurse specialist: 
• acts as t he key worker to addr ess t he person's inf ormation and car e needs 
• has e xperience and training in bladder cancer car e. 
1.1.4 Use a holistic needs assessment t o identify an individualised package of 
information and suppor t for people wit h bladder cancer and, if t hey wish, t heir Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 11 of
34
partners, f amilies or car ers, at k ey point s in t heir car e such as: 
• when t hey are first diagnosed 
• after they have had t heir first tr eatment 
• if their bladder cancer r ecurs or pr ogresses 
• if their tr eatment is changed 
• if palliativ e or end of lif e car e is being discussed. 
1.1.5 When carr ying out a holistic needs assessment, r ecognise t hat man y of t he 
sympt oms, in vestigations and tr eatment s for bladder cancer aff ect t he ur ogenital 
organs and ma y be distr essing and intrusiv e. Discuss wit h the person: 
• the type, stage and grade of t heir cancer and lik ely pr ognosis 
• treatment and f ollow-up options 
• the pot ential complications of intrusiv e procedur es, including urinar y 
retention, urinar y infection, pain, bleeding or need f or a cat heter 
• the impact of tr eatment on t heir se xual healt h and body image, including ho w 
to find suppor t and inf ormation r elevant t o their gender 
• diet and lif estyle, including ph ysical activity 
• smoking cessation f or people who smok e 
• how to find inf ormation about bladder cancer , for example t hrough 
information pr escriptions, sour ces of writt en inf ormation, w ebsit es or D VDs 
• how to find suppor t groups and sur vivorship pr ogrammes 
• how to find inf ormation about r eturning t o work aft er treatment f or cancer 
• how to find inf ormation about financial suppor t (such as fr ee pr escriptions 
and industrial compensation schemes). 
1.1.6 Offer smoking cessation suppor t to all people wit h bladder cancer who smok e, in 
line wit h NICE's guideline on t obacco: pr eventing uptak e, pr omoting quitting and Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 12 of
34
treating dependence . 
1.1.7 Offer people wit h bladder cancer and, if t hey wish, t heir par tners, f amilies or 
carers, oppor tunities t o have discussions at an y stage during t heir tr eatment and 
care wit h: 
• a range of specialist healt hcare professionals, including t hose who can 
provide psy chological suppor t 
• other people wit h bladder cancer who ha ve had similar tr eatment s. 
1.1.8 Clinicians caring f or people wit h bladder cancer should ensur e that t here is close 
liaison betw een secondar y and primar y car e wit h respect t o ongoing and 
community-based suppor t. 
1.1.9 Trusts should consider conducting annual bladder cancer patient satisf action 
surveys de veloped b y their ur ology multidisciplinar y team and people wit h 
bladder cancer , and use t he result s to guide a pr ogramme of quality 
improvement. 
1.2 D iagnosing and stag ing b ladder c ancer 
Diagnosis 
1.2.1 Do not substitut e urinar y biomark ers for cyst oscop y to investigat e suspect ed 
bladder cancer or f or follow-up aft er treatment f or bladder cancer , except in t he 
context of a clinical r esear ch study . 
1.2.2 Consider CT or MRI staging bef ore transur ethral r esection of bladder tumour 
(TURBT) if muscle-in vasive bladder cancer is suspect ed at cyst oscop y. 
1.2.3 Offer whit e-light -guided TURBT wit h one of phot odynamic diagnosis, 
narrow-band imaging, cyt ology or a urinar y biomark er test (such as Ur oVysion 
using fluor escence in-situ h ybridization [FISH], ImmunoCyt or a nuclear matrix 
protein 22 [NMP22] t est) t o people wit h suspect ed bladder cancer . This should 
be carried out or super vised b y a ur ologist e xperienced in TURBT . Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 13 of
34
1.2.4 Obtain detrusor muscle during TURBT . 
1.2.5 Do not tak e random biopsies of normal-looking ur othelium during TURBT unless 
there is a specific clinical indication (f or example, in vestigation of positiv e 
cytology not ot herwise e xplained). 
1.2.6 Record the siz e and number of tumours during TURBT . 
1.2.7 Offer people wit h suspect ed bladder cancer a single dose of intra vesical 
mitomycin C giv en at t he same time as t he first TURBT . 
Staging 
1.2.8 Consider fur ther TURBT wit hin 6  weeks if t he first specimen does not include 
detrusor muscle. 
1.2.9 Offer CT or MRI staging t o people diagnosed wit h muscle-in vasive bladder 
cancer or high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer (see t he section on risk 
classification in non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ) that is being assessed f or 
radical tr eatment. 
1.2.10 Consider CT ur ograph y, carried out wit h other planned CT imaging if possible, t o 
detect upper tract in volvement in people wit h new or r ecurr ent high-risk 
non-muscle-in vasive or muscle-in vasive bladder cancer . 
1.2.11 Consider CT of t he thorax, carried out wit h other planned CT imaging if possible, 
to det ect t horacic malignancy in people wit h muscle-in vasive bladder cancer . 
1.2.12 Consider fluor odeo xyglucose positr on emission t omograph y (FDG PET)-CT f or 
people wit h muscle-in vasive bladder cancer or high-risk non-muscle-in vasive 
bladder cancer bef ore radical tr eatment if t here are indet erminat e findings on CT 
or MRI, or a high risk of metastatic disease (f or example, T3b  disease). Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 14 of
34
1.3 T reating non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
Risk classific ation in non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
Ther e is no widely accept ed classification of risk in non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer . 
To mak e clear r ecommendations f or management, t he Guideline De velopment Gr oup 
developed t he consensus classification in table  1, based on t he evidence r eview ed and 
clinical opinion. 
Table 1 Risk cat egories in non-muscle-in vasiv e bladder cancer 
Low risk Urothelial cancer wit h any of: 
• solitar y pTaG1 wit h a diamet er of less t han 3  cm 
• solitar y pTaG2 (lo w grade) wit h a diamet er of less t han 3  cm 
• any papillar y urothelial neoplasm of lo w malignant pot ential 
Intermediat e 
risk Urothelial cancer t hat is not lo w risk or high risk, including: 
• solitar y pTaG1 wit h a diamet er of mor e than 3  cm 
• multif ocal p TaG1 
• solitar y pTaG2 (lo w grade) wit h a diamet er of mor e than 3  cm 
• multif ocal p TaG2 (lo w grade) 
• pTaG2 (high grade) 
• any pTaG2 ( grade not fur ther specified) 
• any low-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer r ecurring wit hin 
12 mont hs of last tumour occurr ence Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 15 of
34
High risk Urothelial cancer wit h any of: 
• pTaG3 
• pT1G2 
• pT1G3 
• pTis (Cis) 
• aggr essiv e variant s of ur othelial car cinoma, f or example micr opapillar y or 
nested variant s 
Prognostic mar kers and risk classific ation 
1.3.1 Ensur e that f or people wit h non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer all of t he 
following ar e recorded and used t o guide discussions, bot h wit hin 
multidisciplinar y team meetings and wit h the person, about pr ognosis and 
treatment options: 
• recurr ence hist ory 
• size and number of cancers 
• histological type, grade, stage and pr esence ( or absence) of flat ur othelium, 
detrusor muscle (muscularis pr opria), and car cinoma in situ 
• the risk cat egor y of t he person's cancer 
• predict ed risk of r ecurr ence and pr ogression, estimat ed using a risk 
prediction t ool. 
Low-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
1.3.2 For the tr eatment of lo w-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer , see 
recommendations  1.2.3 to 1.2.8. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 16 of
34
Interme diate-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
1.3.3 Offer people wit h newly diagnosed int ermediat e-risk non-muscle-in vasive 
bladder cancer a course of at least 6  doses of intra vesical mit omycin C. 
1.3.4 If intermediat e-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer r ecurs aft er a course of 
intravesical mit omycin C, refer the person's car e to a specialist ur ology 
multidisciplinar y team. 
High-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
1.3.5 If the first TURBT sho ws high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer , offer 
anot her TURBT as soon as possible and no lat er than 6  weeks aft er the first 
resection. 
1.3.6 Offer the choice of intra vesical BCG (Bacille Calmett e-Guérin) or radical 
cystectomy to people wit h high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer , and 
base t he choice on a full discussion wit h the person, t he clinical nurse specialist 
and a ur ologist who per forms bot h intra vesical BCG and radical cyst ectomy. 
Include in y our discussion: 
• the type, stage and grade of t he cancer , the pr esence of car cinoma in situ, 
the pr esence of v ariant pat hology , prostatic ur ethral or bladder neck status 
and t he number of tumours 
• risk of pr ogression t o muscle in vasion, metastases and deat h 
• risk of understaging 
• benefit s of bot h treatment s, including sur vival rat es and t he lik elihood of 
further tr eatment 
• risks of bot h treatment s 
• factors t hat aff ect out comes (f or example, comorbidities and lif e expectancy) 
• impact on quality of lif e, body image, and se xual and urinar y function. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 17 of
34
Intravesical BCG 
1.3.7 Offer induction and maint enance intra vesical BCG t o people ha ving tr eatment 
with intra vesical BCG. 
1.3.8 If induction BCG f ails (because it is not t olerat ed, or bladder cancer persist s or 
recurs aft er treatment wit h BCG), r efer the person's car e to a specialist ur ology 
multidisciplinar y team. 
1.3.9 For people in whom induction BCG has f ailed, t he specialist ur ology 
multidisciplinar y team should assess t he suitability of radical cyst ectomy, or 
further intra vesical t herap y if radical cyst ectomy is unsuitable or declined b y the 
person, or if t he bladder cancer t hat r ecurs is int ermediat e- or lo w-risk. 
Radical cyst ectomy 
1.3.10 See recommendations  1.5.4 to 1.5.7 for people who ha ve chosen radical 
cystectomy. 
Recurr ent non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
1.3.11 Consider fulguration wit hout biopsy f or people wit h recurr ent 
non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer if t hey have all of t he following: 
• no pr evious bladder cancer t hat was int ermediat e- or high-risk 
• a disease-fr ee int erval of at least 6  mont hs 
• solitar y papillar y recurr ence 
• a tumour diamet er of 3  mm or less. 
Manag ing side ef fects of treatmen t 
1.3.12 Do not off er primar y prophylaxis t o prevent BCG-r elated bladder t oxicity e xcept Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 18 of
34
as par t of a clinical trial. 
1.3.13 Seek advice fr om a specialist ur ology multidisciplinar y team if sympt oms of 
bladder t oxicity aft er BCG cannot be contr olled wit h antispasmodics or 
non-opiat e analgesia and ot her causes ha ve been e xcluded b y cyst oscop y. 
1.4 Follow-up af ter tr eatmen t for non -muscle-
invasive bladder c ancer 
1.4.1 Refer people ur gent ly to urological ser vices if t hey have haematuria or ot her 
urinar y sympt oms and a hist ory of non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer . 
1.4.2 See recommendation  1.2.1 on t he use of urinar y biomark ers for follow up aft er 
treatment f or bladder cancer . 
Low-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
1.4.3 Offer people wit h low-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer (see t he section 
on risk classification in non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ) cyst oscopic 
follow-up 3  mont hs and 12  mont hs aft er diagnosis. 
1.4.4 Do not use urinar y biomark ers or cyt ology in addition t o cyst oscop y for follow-up 
after treatment f or low-risk bladder cancer . 
1.4.5 Dischar ge to primar y car e people who ha ve had lo w-risk non-muscle-in vasive 
bladder cancer and who ha ve no r ecurr ence of t he bladder cancer wit hin 
12 mont hs. 
1.4.6 Do not off er routine urinar y cyt ology or pr olonged cyst oscopic f ollow-up aft er 
12 mont hs for people wit h low-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer . Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 19 of
34
Interme diate-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
1.4.7 Offer people wit h intermediat e-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer (see t he 
section on risk classification in non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ) cyst oscopic 
follow-up at 3 , 9 and 18  mont hs, and once a y ear t hereafter. 
1.4.8 Consider dischar ging people who ha ve had int ermediat e-risk 
non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer t o primar y car e aft er 5 years of disease-fr ee 
follow-up. 
High-risk non -muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
1.4.9 Offer people wit h high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer (see t he section 
on risk classification in non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer ) cyst oscopic 
follow-up: 
• every 3 mont hs for the first 2  years then 
• every 6 mont hs for the ne xt 2 years then 
• once a y ear t hereafter. 
1.4.10 For people who ha ve had radical cyst ectomy for high-risk non-muscle-in vasive 
bladder cancer , see recommendations  1.6.1 and 1 .6.2. 
1.5 T reating m uscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
1.5.1 Ensur e that a specialist ur ology multidisciplinar y team r eviews all cases of 
muscle-in vasive bladder cancer , including adenocar cinoma, squamous cell 
carcinoma and neur oendocrine car cinoma, and t hat t he review includes 
histopat hology , imaging and discussion of tr eatment options. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 20 of
34
Neoadjuvant chemother apy for ne wly diagnose d muscle-in vasive 
urothelial b ladder c ancer 
1.5.2 Offer neoadjuv ant chemot herap y using a cisplatin combination r egimen bef ore 
radical cyst ectomy or radical radiot herap y to people wit h newly diagnosed 
muscle-in vasive urothelial bladder cancer f or whom cisplatin-based 
chemot herap y is suitable. Ensur e that t hey have an oppor tunity t o discuss t he 
risks and benefit s wit h an oncologist who tr eats bladder cancer . 
Radic al ther apy for m uscle-in vasive urothelial b ladder c ancer 
1.5.3 Offer a choice of radical cyst ectomy or radiot herap y wit h a radiosensitiser t o 
people wit h muscle-in vasive urothelial bladder cancer f or whom radical t herap y is 
suitable. Ensur e that t he choice is based on a full discussion betw een t he person 
and a ur ologist who per forms radical cyst ectomy, a clinical oncologist and a 
clinical nurse specialist. Include in t he discussion: 
• the pr ognosis wit h or wit hout tr eatment 
• the limit ed evidence about whet her sur gery or radiot herap y wit h a 
radiosensitiser is t he most eff ectiv e cancer tr eatment 
• the benefit s and risks of sur gery and radiot herap y wit h a radiosensitiser , 
including t he impact on se xual and bo wel function and t he risk of deat h as a 
result of t he tr eatment. 
Radical cyst ectomy 
1.5.4 Offer people who ha ve chosen radical cyst ectomy a urinar y stoma, or a continent 
urinar y div ersion (bladder substitution or a cat heterisable r eservoir) if t here are 
no str ong contraindications t o continent urinar y div ersion such as cognitiv e 
impairment, impair ed renal function or significant bo wel disease. 
1.5.5 Members of t he specialist ur ology multidisciplinar y team (including t he bladder 
cancer specialist ur ological sur geon, st oma car e nurse and clinical nurse 
specialist) should discuss wit h the person whet her t o have a urinar y stoma or Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 21 of
34
continent urinar y div ersion, and pr ovide oppor tunities f or the person t o talk wit h 
people who ha ve had t hese pr ocedur es. 
1.5.6 Offer people wit h bladder cancer and, if t hey wish, t heir par tners, f amilies or 
carers, oppor tunities t o have discussions wit h a st oma car e nurse bef ore and 
after radical cyst ectomy as needed. 
Adjuv ant chemot herapy aft er radical cyst ectomy for muscle-in vasiv e or 
lymph-node-positiv e urothelial bladder cancer 
1.5.7 Consider adjuv ant cisplatin combination chemot herap y aft er radical cyst ectomy 
for people wit h a diagnosis of muscle-in vasive or lymph-node-positiv e urothelial 
bladder cancer f or whom neoadjuv ant chemot herap y was not suitable (because 
muscle in vasion was not sho wn on biopsies bef ore cyst ectomy). Ensur e that t he 
person has an oppor tunity t o discuss t he risks and benefit s wit h an oncologist 
who tr eats bladder cancer . 
Radical r adiot herapy 
1.5.8 Use a radiosensitiser (such as mit omycin in combination wit h fluor ouracil [5-FU] 
or carbogen in combination wit h nicotinamide) when giving radical radiot herap y 
(for example, 64  Gy in 32  fractions o ver 6.5 weeks or 55  Gy in 20  fractions o ver 
4 weeks) f or muscle-in vasive urothelial bladder cancer . 
In Februar y 2015 , this was an off -label use of mit omycin in combination wit h 
fluor ouracil and carbogen in combination wit h nicotinamide. See NICE's 
information on pr escribing medicines . 
Manag ing side ef fects of treatmen t 
1.5.9 Seek advice fr om a specialist ur ology multidisciplinar y team if sympt oms of 
bladder t oxicity aft er radiot herap y cannot be contr olled wit h antispasmodics or 
non-opiat e analgesia and ot her causes ha ve been e xcluded b y cyst oscop y. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 22 of
34
1.6 Follow-up af ter tr eatmen t for m uscle-in vasive 
bladder c ancer 
1.6.1 Offer follow-up aft er radical cyst ectomy or radical radiot herap y. 
1.6.2 After radical cyst ectomy consider using a f ollow-up pr otocol t hat consist s of: 
• monit oring of t he upper tract s for hydronephr osis, st ones and cancer using 
imaging and glomerular filtration rat e (GFR) estimation at least annually and 
• monit oring f or local and distant r ecurr ence using CT of t he abdomen, pelvis 
and chest, carried out t oget her wit h other planned CT imaging if possible, 6 , 
12 and 2 4 mont hs aft er radical cyst ectomy and 
• monit oring f or metabolic acidosis and B12 and f olate deficiency at least 
annually and 
• for men wit h a defunctioned ur ethra, ur ethral washing f or cyt ology and/or 
urethroscop y annually f or 5 years t o det ect ur ethral r ecurr ence. 
1.6.3 After radical radiot herap y consider using a f ollow-up pr otocol t hat includes all of 
the following: 
• rigid cyst oscop y 3 mont hs aft er radiot herap y has been complet ed, followed 
by either rigid or fle xible cyst oscop y: 
－ every 3 mont hs for the first 2  years then 
－ every 6 mont hs for the ne xt 2 years then 
－ every year t hereafter, accor ding t o clinical judgement and t he person's 
preference 
• upper -tract imaging e very year f or 5 years 
• monit oring f or local and distant r ecurr ence using CT of t he abdomen, pelvis 
and chest, carried out wit h other planned CT imaging if possible, 6 , 12 and 
24 mont hs aft er radical radiot herap y has finished. 
1.6.4 See recommendation  1.2.1 on t he use of urinar y biomark ers for follow up aft er Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 23 of
34
treatment f or bladder cancer . 
1.7 Manag ing loc ally advanced or me tasta tic 
muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
First-line chemother apy 
1.7.1 Discuss t he role of first -line chemot herap y wit h people who ha ve locally 
advanced or metastatic bladder cancer . Include in y our discussion: 
• prognosis of t heir cancer and 
• advantages and disadv antages of t he tr eatment options, including best 
suppor tive car e. 
1.7.2 Offer a cisplatin-based chemot herap y regimen (such as cisplatin in combination 
with gemcitabine, or accelerat ed [high-dose] met hotrexate, vinblastine, 
doxorubicin and cisplatin [MV AC] in combination wit h granulocyt e-colon y 
stimulating f actor [G-CSF]) t o people wit h locally adv anced or metastatic 
urothelial bladder cancer who ar e otherwise ph ysically fit (ha ve an Eastern 
Cooperativ e Oncology Gr oup [ECOG] per formance status  of 0 or 1) and ha ve 
adequat e renal function (typically defined as a glomerular filtration rat e [GFR] of 
60 ml/min/1 .73 m2
 or mor e). 
1.7.3 Offer carboplatin in combination wit h gemcitabine t o people wit h locally 
advanced or metastatic ur othelial bladder cancer wit h an ECOG per formance 
status of 0  to 2 if a cisplatin-based chemot herap y regimen is unsuitable, f or 
example, because of ECOG per formance status, inadequat e renal function 
(typically defined as a GFR of less t han 60  ml/min/1 .73 m2
) or comorbidity . Assess 
and discuss t he risks and benefit s wit h the person. 
In Februar y 2015 t his was an off -label use of carboplatin in combination wit h 
gemcitabine. See NICE's inf ormation on pr escribing medicines . 
1.7.4 For people ha ving first -line chemot herap y for locally adv anced or metastatic Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 2 4 of
34
bladder cancer: 
• carry out r egular clinical and radiological monit oring and 
• activ ely manage sympt oms of disease and tr eatment -related toxicity and 
• stop first -line chemot herap y if there is e xcessiv e toxicity or disease 
progression. 
Second-line chemother apy 
1.7.5 Discuss second-line chemot herap y wit h people who ha ve locally adv anced or 
metastatic bladder cancer . Include in y our discussion: 
• the pr ognosis of t heir cancer 
• advantages and disadv antages of tr eatment options, including best 
suppor tive car e. 
1.7.6 Consider second-line chemot herap y wit h gemcitabine in combination wit h 
cisplatin, or accelerat ed (high-dose) MV AC in combination wit h G-CSF f or people 
with incurable locally adv anced or metastatic ur othelial bladder cancer whose 
condition has pr ogressed aft er first -line chemot herap y if: 
• their r enal function is adequat e (typically defined as a GFR of 60  ml/min/
1.73 m2
 or mor e) and 
• they are otherwise ph ysically fit (ha ve an ECOG per formance status of 0 or 
1). 
1.7.7 Consider second-line chemot herap y wit h carboplatin in combination wit h 
paclitax el or gemcitabine in combination wit h paclitax el for people wit h incurable 
locally adv anced or metastatic ur othelial bladder cancer f or whom 
cisplatin-based chemot herap y is not suitable, or who choose not t o have it. (Also 
see t he NICE t opic page on bladder cancer f or all our t echnology appraisal 
guidance on t his topic.) 
In Februar y 2015 , this was an off -licence use of carboplatin in combination wit h Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 25 of
34
gemcitabine and gemcitabine in combination wit h paclitax el. See NICE's 
information on pr escribing medicines . 
1.7.8 For recommendations on vinflunine as second-line chemot herap y for people wit h 
incurable locally adv anced or metastatic ur othelial bladder cancer , see NICE's 
technology appraisal guidance on vinflunine f or the tr eatment of adv anced or 
metastatic transitional cell car cinoma of t he ur othelial tract . 
1.7.9 For people ha ving second-line chemot herap y for locally adv anced or metastatic 
bladder cancer: 
• carry out r egular clinical and radiological monit oring and 
• activ ely manage sympt oms of disease and tr eatment -related toxicity and 
• stop second-line chemot herap y if there is e xcessiv e toxicity or disease 
progression. 
Genomic biomar ker-base d treatmen t 
The point at which t o use genomic biomark er-based t herap y in solid tumour tr eatment 
pathways is uncer tain. See t he NICE t opic page on genomic biomark er-based cancer 
treatment s. 
Manag ing sym ptoms o f loc ally advanced or me tasta tic b ladder 
cancer 
Bladder sympt oms 
1.7.10 Offer palliativ e hypofractionat ed radiot herap y to people wit h sympt oms of 
haematuria, dysuria, urinar y frequency or nocturia caused b y adv anced bladder 
cancer t hat is unsuitable f or pot entially curativ e treatment. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 26 of
34
Loin pain and sympt oms of r enal f ailur e 
1.7.11 Discuss tr eatment options wit h people who ha ve locally adv anced or metastatic 
bladder cancer wit h ureteric obstruction. Include in y our discussion: 
• prognosis of t heir cancer and 
• advantages and disadv antages of t he tr eatment options, including best 
suppor tive car e. 
1.7.12 Consider per cutaneous nephr ostomy or r etrograde st enting (if t echnically 
feasible) f or people wit h locally adv anced or metastatic bladder cancer and 
ureteric obstruction who need tr eatment t o relieve pain, tr eat acut e kidne y injur y 
or impr ove renal function bef ore fur ther tr eatment. 
1.7.13 If facilities f or per cutaneous nephr ostomy or r etrograde st enting ar e not a vailable 
at the local hospital, or if t hese pr ocedur es ar e unsuccessful, discuss t he options 
with a specialist ur ology multidisciplinar y team f or people wit h bladder cancer 
and ur eteric obstruction. 
Intractable bleeding 
1.7.14 Evaluat e the cause of intractable bleeding wit h the local ur ology t eam. 
1.7.15 Consider h ypofractionat ed radiot herap y or embolisation f or people wit h 
intractable bleeding caused b y incurable bladder cancer . 
1.7.16 If a person has intractable bleeding caused b y bladder cancer and radiot herap y 
or embolisation ar e not suitable tr eatment s, discuss fur ther management wit h a 
specialist ur ology multidisciplinar y team. 
Pelvic pain 
1.7.17 Evaluat e the cause of pelvic pain wit h the local ur ology t eam. 
1.7.18 Consider , in addition t o best suppor tive car e, 1 or mor e of t he following t o treat Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 27 of
34
pelvic pain caused b y incurable bladder cancer: 
• hypofractionat ed radiot herap y if the person has not had pelvic radiot herap y 
• nerve block 
• palliativ e chemot herap y. 
1.8 S pecialist pallia tive care for pe ople wi th 
incur able bladder c ancer 
1.8.1 A member of t he tr eating t eam should off er people wit h incurable bladder cancer 
a sensitiv e explanation t hat t heir disease cannot be cur ed and r efer them t o the 
urology multidisciplinar y team. 
1.8.2 Tell the primar y car e team t hat t he person has been giv en a diagnosis of 
incurable bladder cancer wit hin 2 4 hours of t elling t he person. 
1.8.3 A member of t he ur ology multidisciplinar y team should discuss t he pr ognosis and 
management options wit h people wit h incurable bladder cancer . 
1.8.4 Discuss palliativ e car e ser vices wit h people wit h incurable bladder cancer and, if 
needed and t hey agr ee, refer them t o a specialist palliativ e car e team (f or mor e 
information, see recommendation  1.1.4 on holistic needs assessment  and NICE's 
guidelines on impr oving suppor tive and palliativ e car e for adult s wit h cancer  and 
improving out comes in ur ological cancers ). 
1.8.5 Offer people wit h sympt omatic incurable bladder cancer access t o a ur ological 
team wit h the full range of options f or managing sympt oms. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 28 of
34
Recommenda tions f or research 
The Guideline De velopment Gr oup has made t he following r ecommendations f or resear ch, 
based on it s review of e vidence, t o impr ove NICE guidance and patient car e in t he futur e. 
The Guideline De velopment Gr oup's full set of r ecommendations f or resear ch ar e detailed 
in the full guideline . 
1 Patient satisfaction 
What ar e the causativ e and contribut ory factors underlying t he persist ently very low levels 
of repor ted patient satisf action f or bladder cancer? 
Why this is im portant 
The ur ological cancers gr ouping (which includes bladder cancer but e xcludes pr ostat e 
cancer) has consist ently appear ed near t he bott om of t he table of patient satisf action 
comparisons of all cancer types in national patient e xperience sur veys. Pr ostat e cancer 
(which is also managed in ur ological ser vices) is r ecorded separat ely and has continued t o 
appear near t he top of t he tables. 
It is uncer tain wh y this is t he case, e xcept t hat t here is no w an accept ed link betw een t he 
level of clinical nurse specialist allocation, inf ormation and suppor t provision and patient 
satisf action. The ur ological cancers gr ouping has t he lo west le vel of clinical nurse 
specialist allocation in comparison wit h all ot her cancer types or gr oupings (including 
prostat e cancer). The pr olonged patt ern of intrusiv e procedur es that dominat e 
investigation, tr eatment and f ollow-up r egimens f or bladder cancer ma y also contribut e to 
this position. Additionally , there is concern t hat people wit h bladder cancer at or near t he 
end of lif e, who ar e by that stage oft en quit e frail and elderly , may not alwa ys ha ve access 
to the full range of palliativ e and ur ological suppor t and ma y, at times, be tr eated in 
general war ds in hospital and e xperience significant sympt oms of pain and bleeding 
(haematuria). 
To explor e this resear ch question bladder cancer patient s need t o be identified separat ely 
from t he generic gr oup of ur ological cancer patient s in nationally collect ed data set s. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 29 of
34
2 BCG or primar y cystectomy in hig h-risk non -
muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
Is primar y radical cyst ectomy mor e eff ectiv e than primar y intra vesical BCG in high-risk 
non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer (see t he section on risk classification in non-muscle-
invasive bladder cancer ), in t erms of quality of lif e and cancer -specific out comes? 
Why this is im portant 
Options f or people wit h high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer include cyst oscop y 
surveillance, BCG  immunot herap y or radical sur gery. To dat e, these ha ve not been dir ectly 
compar ed acr oss t he same population t o understand t heir r elativ e benefit s. 
Bladder -sparing appr oaches a void major sur gery, but ha ve a gr eater risk of cancer 
progression. The pot ential adv antage of bladder -sparing appr oaches compar ed wit h 
cystectomy in maintaining quality of lif e ma y be off set b y continuing concern about cancer 
progression and morbidity fr om tr eatment. Primar y cyst ectomy ma y impr ove sur vival; 
however, it has high shor t-term risks and lif e-changing consequences. It will be 
overtreatment f or those people whose cancer w ould not ha ve progressed. 
3 Follow-up o f hig h-risk non -muscle-in vasive 
bladder c ancer 
In people wit h high-risk non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer , are these f ollow-up r egimens 
equally eff ectiv e in t erms of identification of pr ogression, cost eff ectiv eness and 
healt h-related quality of lif e? 
• Cyst oscopic f ollow-up at 3 , 6, 12, 18 , 24, 36 and 48  mont hs, and t hen annually , 
interspersed wit h non-in vasive urinar y tests. 
• Cyst oscopic f ollow-up at 3 , 6, 9, 12, 15 , 18, 21, 24, 30, 36, 42 and 48  mont hs, and t hen 
annually t hereafter. 
Why this is im portant 
Cyst oscop y is curr ently the standar d of car e for follow-up of people wit h high-risk 
non-muscle-in vasive bladder cancer . Regular cyst oscop y ma y be associat ed wit h anxiety , Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 30 of
34
procedural discomf ort to the person and significant cost s to the NHS. 
Urine t ests based on a v ariety of t echnologies (including cyt ology , fluor escence in-situ 
hybridization [FISH] and pr oteomic platf orms) can det ect high-grade r ecurr ence, raising 
the possibility t hat 1  or mor e of t hese t ests could be used t o reduce t he fr equency of 
cystoscop y. This could impr ove acceptability t o patient s and r educe cost s to the NHS 
without incr easing t he risk of disease pr ogression. 
Ther e is a lack of e vidence on t he optimal fr equency of f ollow-up and whet her t he 
frequency of cyst oscop y follow-up can saf ely be r educed b y substitution of urinar y tests. 
4 Biomar kers for tr eatmen t sele ction 
In patient s wit h muscle-in vasive bladder cancer suitable f or radical tr eatment, does t he 
use of biomark ers enable patient s to select mor e eff ectiv e treatment, and impr ove their 
outcomes, compar ed wit h treatment select ed wit hout biomark ers? 
Why this is im portant 
Response t o sur gery or radiot herap y is difficult t o predict f or individuals. Ther e is v ariation 
not only in t he cur e rat es for patient s wit h muscle-in vasive bladder cancer tr eated wit h 
either sur gery or radiot herap y, but also in t he side eff ects experienced during and aft er 
treatment. The usefulness of curr ent biomark ers in pr edicting tr eatment out comes f or 
individual patient s has not been clearly established. Curr ently treatment decisions ar e 
based on patient -related factors, and patient and clinician pr eference. R esear ch int o 
biomark ers t hat can pr edict t he response of t he patient's muscle-in vasive bladder cancer 
to either radiot herap y or sur gery could help individual patient s and clinicians decide which 
treatment is mor e suitable and is consider ed an impor tant st ep toward individualised 
treatment. 
5 Follow-up af ter r adical treatmen t for or gan-
confine d muscle-in vasive bladder c ancer 
Is sympt om-based r eview as eff ectiv e as scheduled f ollow-up f or people tr eated wit h 
radical cyst ectomy or radical radiot herap y for or gan-confined, muscle-in vasive bladder 
cancer? Out comes of int erest ar e overall sur vival, healt h-related quality of lif e, resour ce 
use and cost. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 31 of
34
Why this is im portant 
Standar d car e aft er treatment f or or gan-confined, muscle-in vasive bladder cancer is 
scheduled f ollow-up at int ervals set out b y the tr eating t eam. Alt hough t his can be 
reassuring f or bot h the patient and t he tr eating t eam, it is not kno wn whet her scheduled 
follow-up off ers clinical benefit compar ed wit h sympt om-based r eview , which is 
increasingly used f or people wit h other cancers. Mor eover, there are significant cost s 
associat ed wit h follow-up. The curr ent e vidence about f ollow-up is confined t o 
cystectomy. Ther e is no e vidence concerning f ollow-up aft er radiot herap y. In addition, t he 
evidence on radiological f ollow-up uses mainly out dated imaging t echniques. Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 32 of
34
Finding mor e inf orma tion and c ommi ttee 
details 
To find NICE guidance on r elated topics, including guidance in de velopment, see t he NICE 
topic page on bladder cancer . 
For full details of t he evidence and t he guideline committ ee's discussions, see t he full 
guideline and e vidence r eview . You can also find inf ormation about how the guideline was 
developed , including details of t he committ ee. 
NICE has pr oduced tools and r esour ces t o help y ou put t his guideline int o practice . For 
general help and advice on putting our guidelines int o practice, see resour ces t o help y ou 
put NICE guidance int o practice . Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 33 of
34
Update inf orma tion 
Minor changes since publication 
Januar y 2022: Minor changes t o redirect NICE Pat hways links. 
ISBN: 9 78-1-47 31-0991-9 Bladder cancer: diagnosis and management (NG2)
© NICE 202 4. All right s reserved. Subject t o Notice of right s (https://www .nice.or g.uk/t erms-and-
conditions#notice-of -right s).Page 34 of
34
